debates of the senate (hansard) 
2nd session, 36th legislature, 
volume 138, number 53 
tuesday may 9, 2000 
the honorable gildas l. molgat, chairman 
contents 
senators 'statements 
the second world war 
the fifty-fifth anniversary of victory day in europe 
national palliative care week 
the death of judge ronald newton pugsley, qc 
tribute 
national defense 
the airworthiness of sea king helicopters-a pilot's logbook 
freshwater conservation 
congratulations on receiving honorary doctorates from mount allison university 
the house of commons page exchange program 
current affairs 
the marine liability act 
committee report 
first lecture 
bill to change the name of the electoral district of rimouski-mitis 
first lecture 
the canada-france interparliamentary association 
tabling of the report of the canadian group of the meeting held in paris, france 
question period 
national defense 
the replacement of sea king helicopters 
mark visitor 
the environment 
ontario-impact of the development project on the oak ridges moraine 
national defense 
ballistic missile defense system agreement with the united states-the decision-making process 
foreign affairs 
the reaction to the civil war in sierra leone 
the united nations 
government support for the center for victims of torture 
health 
the reaction to growing demand 
distinguished visitors 
agenda 
the work of the senate 
bill giving effect to the requirement for clarity formulated by the supreme court of canada in its opinion on the reference on the secession of quebec 
second reading-debate continued 
bill on the modernization of certain benefit and obligation regimes 
second reading 
referral to committee 
canada elections act bill 
third reading-motion in amendment-vote deferred 
bill on payments in lieu of taxes 
third reading 
the special senate committee on bill c-20 
motion for constitution-president's ruling-adjournment of debate 
bill on the protection of young people against tobacco 
second reading 
referral to committee 
sir john a. macdonald day bill 
second reading-debate continued 
bill to change the names of certain electoral districts 
second reading - adjournment of debate 
privileges, rules and procedures 
fourth report of the committee-debate adjourned 
national defense 
the need for canada to join the united states for the national missile defense program - inquiry - debate continued 
the future of canada's defense policy 
interpellation 
prime minister's visit to the middle east and the persian gulf region 
inquiry-adjournment of debate 
foreign affairs 
authorization for committee to study department of foreign affairs and international trade performance report 
authorization given to the committee to examine developments in russia and ukraine 
adjournment 
the senate 
tuesday may 9, 2000 
the meeting opened at 2 p.m., the president being in the chair.  
pray.  
the second world war 
the fifty-fifth anniversary of victory day in europe 
the honorable william m. kelly:
honorable senators, it is with great pleasure that i rise this afternoon to mark the fifty-fifth anniversary of the end of the war in europe.  
indeed, on may 8, 1945, world war ii ended for canada with the unconditional surrender of germany in europe. 
after six long winters of despair, canadians across the country rejoiced at the end of this stage of the war. 
men and women took to the streets as victory parades swept through all of canada's main streets. 
church bells could be heard for miles around as bonfires were lit and children shouted for joy. 
during this time, indescribable pain was felt by many young widows, parents, siblings, at the thought that a loved one had made the ultimate sacrifice to ensure our freedom.  
this year, more than 4,000 canadian veterans commemorate the fifty-fifth anniversary of victory day in europe by returning to holland, a place of special significance to them. 
for veterans, it is an opportunity to remember a time and a country where the atrocities of the past were committed and where relatives and friends died on the battlefield.  
the dutch have not forgotten the valiant battle these soldiers fought against a monstrous enemy. 
yesterday in the netherlands, more than 150,000 people lined up along the route and cheered continuously, to express their love and gratitude to the canadian soldiers who freed them from the shackles of war.  
the emotional reception the soldiers received in holland should make canadians never forget what has been gained and what has been lost, all in defense of the right to be free.  
honorable senators, today we have to thank each and every one of these soldiers for giving canadians the freedom we enjoy today. 
i believe it is only right that we honor the sacrifices of the past by ensuring that this history never repeats itself.  
national palliative care week 
the honorable sharon carstairs:
honorable senators, i am pleased to inform my colleagues and all canadians that we have been celebrating national hospice palliative care week since yesterday and until may 14.  
the goal of palliative care is to alleviate suffering and improve the quality of life of people who have or are dying from advanced disease. 
this kind of care involves the patient and their family in planning treatment and care so that they can make choices based on knowledge and understanding.  
as part of palliative care, members of a diverse team including physicians, nurses, social workers, home care service planners, volunteers and other therapists provide social, economic and spiritual support to the patient and their family. .  
the canadian hospice palliative care association is a national organization that plays a leading role in hospice palliative care in canada in various forms including collaboration and representation, development of national standards of care, support for research, recommending policy improvements, allocating research funding and supporting caregivers. 
this organization also works to increase awareness, knowledge and skills related to palliative care among the public, health care providers and volunteers.  
honorable senators, i invite you to join me in congratulating the dedicated professionals, caregivers and volunteers who deliver palliative care, as well as the canadian hospice palliative care association and its affiliates, who work to ensure comfort and dignity. of the dying.  
the death of judge ronald newton pugsley, qc 
tribute 
the honorable donald h. oliver:
honorable senators, canada has lost a brilliant jurist, a remarkable judge and a distinguished canadian. 
justice ronald n. pugsley passed away suddenly over the weekend at his home in halifax. 
he is remembered for a rich and successful legal career as one of canada's most famous litigators before becoming a judge of the nova scotia court of appeal.  
judge pugsley was born in toronto, and was the only son of thompson and mabel pugsley. 
he was educated at upper canada college and subsequently received degrees in art, commerce and law at dalhousie university in halifax. 
he was an exceptional student.  
justice pugsley's legal career began in 1957 with the firm of stewart mackeen and covert, which later became the firm of stewart, mckelvey, stirling and scales, where he later became a senior partner. 
in 1973 he was appointed queen's counsel.  
as a litigator, justice pugsley has been involved in some of nova scotia's best-known legal cases, including the donald marshall inquiry. 
he was also formerly president of the nova scotia barristers society and a fellow of the american college of trial lawyers. 
he was also president of the dalhousie law school alumni association. 
justice pugsley was a co-founder of the civil litigation program at the law school where he taught for many years.  
honorable senators, i have had the honor of assisting justice pugsley in several trials. 
he was a brilliant lawyer who prepared in great detail for his appearance in court. 
justice pugsley mastered the art of obtaining information from witnesses without difficulty, which was often the turning point in a trial. 
in many cases, opposing counsel and witnesses did not understand until too late the devastating impact of this ordeal. 
he was an inspiration and he will be missed.  
judge pugsley's greatness has not gone to his head; he was always courteous, kind and polite to everyone he met.
he was appointed to the nova scotia court of appeal in 1993. 
honorable senators, justice ronald n. pugsley will be missed. 
i offer my sincere condolences to his wife, joan, his sons, michael and alex, and his daughters, alison, meredith and amy.  
national defense 
the airworthiness of sea king helicopters-a pilot's logbook 
the honorable j. michael forrestall:
honorable senators, the "pan pan pan" radio message from an aircraft signals a problem in flight. 
even if it does not endanger the lives of the occupants of the aircraft at the time, the problem could very well become an emergency. 
this signal tells ground personnel to prepare to respond to a possible emergency and ends all chatter on the relevant radio circuits.  
honorable senators, not all problems can justify such a message, but if the situation worsens to the point that emergency action must be taken, then the distress message "mayday" is broadcast. 
this is often the last message from such an aircraft.  
a young sea king pilot recently expressed his concern by trying to put into context the feud over the meaning of the terms "safe" and "dangerous". 
he has been piloting sea kings for five years and his logbook indicates that during this period he has accumulated some 860 flight hours and that he has been in a situation 24 times giving rise to the broadcast of 'a "pan" message. 
according to his calculations, he found himself in such a situation once every 12 sorties, or every 36 hours of flight, the average time of a mission being three hours. 
this does not mean that he didn't have difficulties the other 11 rides, only that the problem did not warrant a "pan" message.  
not all pan situations are caused by device failures. 
for example, they could be due to unusual ice buildup or impending fuel starvation, but i'm told that in the case of the sea kings, 90% 100 of the "pan" situations are of mechanical origin.
in during crew training, instructors always recall that an incident or emergency aboard a sea king can occur when the aircraft is, in the middle of the night, 100 miles from its home vessel. , over the north atlantic and in heavy weather.  
this same young aviator is convinced that crews are well trained to deal with problems like this and that the sea kings are still "safe". 
however, like the other sea king pilots, he does not like to hear from people who do not understand the situation and who repeat what the authorities say that the helicopter is "not dangerous", thus suggesting that all is well and that the safety issues associated with this tired and unreliable old device are not that urgent.  
freshwater conservation 
the honorable lorna milne:
we see this every day in reports of dead cattle in mongolia, india and pakistan, drought in the american midwest, but especially in reports that show us emaciated limbs, emaciated faces and dull eyes. children dying in ethiopia.  
water covers nearly 70% of the water. 100 of the surface of the earth, but almost all that water except 2.5%. 100, is salty.
most of the world's scarce freshwater supplies are trapped in polar ice caps and mountain tops. 
much of the rest comes from monsoon rains or flows to the sea through larger streams. 
most living things have to fight over the little that remains accessible. 
but we humans, who are just one of the earth's roughly seven million species, consume 54% of the world's food. 100 of all accessible water.
honorable senators, canada is fortunate to have the largest reserves of fresh water in the world. 
ontario alone has some 3,000 lakes. 
there are 2,600 kilometers of coastline along the great lakes, which is the longest lakeshore in the world, and yet we are still struggling. 
the water table in southern ontario has never been lower. 
in the great lakes, water levels are half a meter to one meter below normal. 
the ports are drying up and dredging is being done to keep international waterways and some marinas open. 
in addition, last winter we had some of the lowest snowfall in history. 
there is no improvement in the situation in sight.  
honorable senators, we do not know whether the climate change that is beginning to manifest itself is due to a normal cycle of warming and cooling or whether it is the result of thoughtless human inventiveness and neglect. 
either way, this situation will last for a long time and cannot be remedied inexpensively, easily or quickly, if at all it can be remedied.  
all levels of government need to start educating people on how to conserve water. 
we must stop wasting this resource without restraint. 
i urge the federal government to launch a proactive positive incentive program for industry to reduce water use in manufacturing and construction.  
honorable senators, read the newspapers and you will know the future. 
if we do not start now to conserve this precious resource on a voluntary basis, conservation measures will inevitably be imposed on us.  
congratulations on receiving honorary doctorates from mount allison university 
the honorable mabel m. deware:
honorable senators, yesterday during spring convocation at mount allison university in new brunswick honorary doctorates were awarded to an honorable senator and his lovely wife. 
i ask honorable senators to join me in congratulating senator michael meighen and ms. kelly meighen.  
the house of commons page exchange program 
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, i present to you the pages that come to us from the house of commons this week.  
adrienne fowlie is originally from nepean, ontario, and studies environmental science and english at the university of ottawa.  
mark greenan is a political science student in the faculty of social sciences at the university of ottawa. 
mark is a native of summerside, prince edward island. 
to my right is devorah kobluk, a student in the faculty of arts at the university of ottawa.  
on behalf of all honorable senators, i welcome you to the senate. 
may you have an interesting and rewarding week with us.  
current affairs 
the marine liability act 
committee report 
the honorable lise bacon, chair of the standing senate committee on transport and communications, has the honor to present the following report: 
tuesday may 9, 2000 
the standing senate committee on transport and communications has the honor to present its 
fourth report 
your committee, to which was referred bill s-17, an act respecting marine liability and the validity of certain regulations, has, in accordance with the order of reference of tuesday, april 4, 2000, considered the said bill and in fact now reports with the following amendments: 
page 10, article 29:
substitute lines 3 to 18 with the following: 
"maritime arising from the same event, in the event of death or bodily injury caused to persons transported on a ship other than under the regime of a passenger transport contract, is set at the higher of the following amounts 
(a) 2,000,000 units of account; 
b) the product of 175,000 units of account by: 
(i) the number of passengers that the ship may carry under the certificate required under part v of the canada shipping act, 
(ii) the number of persons on board the vessel, if no certificate is required under this part.  
(3) subsection (2) does not apply: 
(a) in the case of the master of a ship, a member of the crew and any other person employed or engaged on board, in whatever capacity, on the business of that ship; 
b) in the case of a person carried on board a ship other than a ship used for commercial or public purposes ".  
substitute lines 32 to 42 with the following: 
"canada to any place in canada, directly or through a place outside of canada; 
b) in the absence of a contract of carriage, the transport by water of persons or persons and their luggage on a ship, with the exception of: 
(i) the master of the vessel, any member of the crew and any other person employed or engaged on board, in any capacity, on the business of that vessel, 
(ii) a person carried on board a ship other than a ship used for commercial or public purposes ".  
respectfully submitted, 
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, when will we consider this report?  
(on motion of senator bacon, consideration of the report is placed on the orders of the day for the next sitting.)  
proceeds of crime (money laundering) bill 
first lecture 
(the bill was read a first time.)  
(on motion of senator hays, second reading of the bill is placed on the orders of the day for the sitting of thursday, may 11, 2000.)  
bill to change the name of the electoral district of rimouski-mitis 
first lecture 
his honor the speaker announces that he has received from the commons a message accompanied by bill c-445, an act to change the name of the electoral district of rimouski-mitis.  
(the bill was read a first time.)  
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, when will we read this bill a second time?  
(on motion of senator rompkey, second reading of the bill is placed on the orders of the day for thursday, may 11, 2000.)  
the canada-france interparliamentary association 
tabling of the report of the canadian group of the meeting held in paris, france 
the honorable gerald-a. 
honorable senators, i have the honor to table the report of the canadian group of the canada-france interparliamentary association, which participated in the meeting of the association's standing committee in paris, from march 6 to 10, 2000.  
question period 
national defense 
the replacement of sea king helicopters 
the honorable j. michael forrestall:
honorable senators, my question is for the leader of the government in the senate.  
the words that my colleagues and i expressed last week are not a distress message. 
however, let us not be mistaken; it is indeed a "pan" message.  
as you know, those in the driver's seat who ignore a "pan" message incur criminal liability, as do those who ignore a distress message. 
the only difference is in the length of the prison sentence.  
will the government continue to ignore this "pan, pan, pan" message or does it intend to initiate a program to replace the sea king helicopters? 
are we maintaining the status quo? 
have the decisions already been made for a long time? 
does the government in fact have no intention of moving to a replacement program, either now or for the foreseeable future?  
what exactly is it? 
it is not fair for the women and men who serve on these planes and for the house which continues to ask questions not to get these questions answered.  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
honorable senators, i thank the honorable senator for his continued interest in this important matter. 
i also thank him for his clarification on some of the comments that were made in the house last week.  
i understand the honorable senator's insistence on this issue. 
i would say that all parties involved, including the minister of national defense, have made it known publicly that replacing these devices is a matter of very high priority. 
in fact the minister said it was a top priority business because these devices are old and, as we said, they require considerable work for their maintenance.  
the minister also recognizes, like the senator who raised the issue in this chamber, that the replacement will not happen overnight. 
even assuming an official announcement is made this afternoon, the government would continue to implement a major equipment repair, renovation and modernization program in the order of approximately $ 50 million. 
this program is apparently progressing rapidly and should be completed within a reasonable period of time. 
it is not intended to exclude or eliminate the priority that we have spoken of, but it shows that the minister is well aware of the urgency of this kind of modernization.  
senator forrestall:
honorable senators, i did not really intend to ask a supplementary question, but the minister has just said once again that the government is responding to the sea kings safety problems by putting forward a modernization program of 50 millions of dollars. 
does the minister know that almost half of this $ 50 million is used to reduce support costs? 
take, for example, the sea king's weapons systems support plan, the wsfp 1998-2003, dated september 4, 1997. 
in short, we are the last country to use these types of engine and transmission. 
the cost and lack of spare parts availability of these two items is responsible for the increased spending, not the benevolence of a government concerned with aircraft safety. 
we had to spend that money or else these devices would not have flown, whether it was safe or not. 
senator boudreau:
honorable senators, i am glad that the honorable senator refers to the report i provided to him regarding the nature of the $ 50 million program. 
it is not a fully comprehensive report. 
i will not repeat the details i gave previously, but i will point out that there are programs regarding the replacement and repair of the mid section, the engine upgrade and the replacement of the transmission, repairs which to they alone represent $ 46.5 million. 
these are major repairs and they are undertaken to address safety concerns and, indeed, to extend the useful operational life of aircraft. 
some of the problems mentioned by the honorable senator and others are related as one would expect to these various modernization programs. 
it is to be hoped that these expenses which are being made at a fairly rapid rate will correct the majority of the existing problems.  
mark visitor 
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, before i give the floor to other senators, i wish to introduce to you a very distinguished visitor who is in the gallery:
his excellency li ruihuan, chairman of the chinese political and people's consultative conference of the people's republic of china. 
chairman li is accompanied by a delegation from the consultative conference which, i point out to honorable senators, is roughly the equivalent of the senate of canada.  
mr. speaker, ladies and gentlemen of the delegation, welcome to the senate of canada.  
the environment 
ontario-impact of the development project on the oak ridges moraine 
the honorable mira spivak:
honorable senators, i have a question for the leader of the government in the senate regarding the role of government in the question of whether development of the oak ridges moraine should be stopped. 
in 1999, the minister of the environment established an environmental assessment panel to assess the red hill creek highway based on, in his words, the level of public concern about the project and the considerable adverse effect it could have on the environment.  
the moraine feeds some 30 rivers, and the development of these lands could dramatically change the way the moraine treats water. 
in terms of public concern, nearly 3,000 residents of the greater toronto area attended public meetings on three different nights to oppose development, and 465 scientists signed a document calling for to protect the moraine. 
the ontario government has also said it is concerned. 
the current minister of the environment, then responsible for fisheries and oceans, also recognized local concerns and potential environmental impacts by calling for a review of the proposed extension of the red hill creek expressway.  
why has the government of canada, through its department of fisheries and oceans or the department of the environment, not declared itself a responsible authority, as it did in the previous case, under of the canadian environmental assessment act, and has it not established an expert panel, as it did in the case of the red hill creek expressway, to ensure that residents of the greater toronto area continue to benefit from fresh water and rivers full of fish and to have the assurance that their government genuinely cares about the environment in this area?  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
honorable senators, i thank the honorable senator for this question. 
she wants very specific information on this project. 
i do not know the details and i think it would be wise of me to bring this matter to the attention of the minister of the environment, the former minister of fisheries as she calls it. 
the minister was well known for his strong commitment to environmental issues long before he took on this portfolio. 
i will ask him what exactly is the current position of the government of canada and, perhaps, what could be the role or the position of the government of ontario and its ministry of the environment.  
senator spivak:
honorable senators, of course i know the credentials of the minister of the environment and i think he is an admirable person. 
nevertheless, it seems to me that there is a federal responsibility there. 
it's not just about helping the ontario government. 
this responsibility is under federal law, and it was exercised - to my pleasant surprise - on the issue of the red hill creek highway.  
it is not our intention to politically discredit anyone, but in his conversation with the minister or the ministry, perhaps the leader of the government could find out why, in the case of the red hill creek highway , they moved very quickly when, in this case, which will have a considerable impact in ontario, they have not yet acted.  
senator boudreau:
honorable senators, i will certainly bring this matter to the attention of the minister, along with the references that senator spivak made to the other situation. 
hopefully the minister will also deal with this issue in his response.  
as the honorable senator knows, the federal government and the provinces share jurisdiction over the environment. 
as i do not know the details of the project to which the honorable senator refers, i would hesitate to draw any conclusions at this time. 
i will certainly ask the minister the question, and in the manner expressed by the honorable senator.  
national defense 
ballistic missile defense system agreement with the united states-the decision-making process 
the honorable douglas roche:
honorable senators, my question is for the leader of the government in the senate. 
could the minister confirm, or provide some explanation for, a report in the toronto star last week that a special cabinet committee has been formed to examine the controversial issue of canada's participation in the national system? of missile defense proposed by the united states? 
could the minister indicate how the government will make this decision? 
will it be through a secret cabinet decision, a government motion, or consultation with nuclear disarmament experts in canada?  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
honorable senators, i did not hear the whole question. 
regarding the first part, i am not aware of the establishment of such a committee, but that could just mean that i am not on it. 
however, i will ask the question on behalf of the honorable senator.  
would the honorable senator please repeat the second part of his question?  
senator roche:
honorable senators, i thank the minister for his response. 
has the government taken note of the statements made over the past two weeks at the united nations conference on the review of the non-proliferation treaty? 
at this conference, close allies of the united states, especially the united kingdom and france, criticized the missile defense system, saying it threatens international stability and undermines arms control agreements.  
senator boudreau:
honorable senators, i am sure the government is aware of these statements. 
on the us missile defense system, the government has yet to take a position. 
in fact, my data indicates that the us government, or any of its departments, did not ask the canadian government to participate in this project.  
i cannot predict what the government or cabinet will do. 
however, for the moment, the cabinet has taken no position. 
as far as i know, cabinet has not been called upon to take a position.  
the honorable roch bolduc:
honorable senators, three months ago the government did not express its position on this matter. 
however, the minister of foreign affairs opposed it. 
the minister of national defense mentioned that the matter was not settled. 
there seems to be a lack of coordination between two ministers in the council of ministers. 
it is annoying for the government.  
i would like to know whether the leader of the government's response means that the government has not taken a position. 
three months ago, the government did not clearly state its position. 
yet at some point the government will have to plug in. 
this is what we want to know. 
when will the government switch on?  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
honorable senators, i dare believe that my information is not three months old. 
the most recent information i have, and i will check to make sure i have the most up-to-date information, indicates that the government has not received any requests. 
as long as he does not receive a request in this regard, he has no reason to take a position one way or the other.  
the honorable marcel prud'homme:
honorable senators, this question was asked recently of some of us in another part of the world. 
it seems to us that a debate is already taking place in cabinet; it was therefore certainly seized of the matter, at least for the purpose of discussion.
we all want to know who wins at the moment. 
who wins, the minister of foreign affairs or the minister of national defense? 
likewise, who speaks for whom?  
i had the honor of attending the work of the united nations disarmament commission alongside prime minister trudeau. 
how is it that whenever it comes to non-proliferation treaties, we immediately point fingers at india and pakistan while remaining silent on the middle east? 
it is no longer a sin to assert in public that israel is a nuclear power. 
it used to be a mortal sin to even suggest that this country had a nuclear arsenal. 
yet the government of canada and our ambassador to the united nations stubbornly refuse to mention four of the non-signatories to this treaty, to point out only two, india and pakistan. 
either we name all those who have not signed it, or we designate them collectively.  
can the minister let us know by the end of the week who has the upper hand, right now, in cabinet discussions?  
second, could he get the government, when it mentions the non-signatories to the non-proliferation treaty, to name them all? 
i know how embarrassing some people to name all these non-signatories, but israel is one and it has contaminated the whole middle east. 
he has launched an arms race in the middle east that is totally contrary to the principles dear to canada, this great peacemaker in the world.  
senator boudreau:
honorable senators, the second question is a little easier to answer than the first. 
with regard to the second question, i will not fail to pass on the request of the senator, who would like that whenever there is a question of non-signatories to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, all non-signatories are appointed.  
as for any deliberations that might take place in cabinet, it is difficult for me to promise to account for them or even to say whether they actually took place. 
however, if cabinet makes a decision on this matter, i will be sure to advise honorable senators as soon as possible.  
foreign affairs 
the reaction to the civil war in sierra leone 
the honorable a. raynell andreychuk:
honorable senators, when the united nations was unwilling, or unable, to intervene vigorously in kosovo, canada was one of the countries to take innovative action in the name of human security.  
will the leader of the government in the senate agree that the human security issues in sierra leone today are as serious as those that existed in kosovo a year ago? 
what innovative solutions is canada proposing given the fact that the un cannot at the moment or does not want to intervene there?  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
honorable senators, i thank senator andreychuk for raising this very timely matter, as we can see in the news in recent days.  
the honorable senator is probably aware that canada does not have an embassy in sierra leone. 
our high commission in india, the neighboring country, has combined responsibility for sierra leone.  
i am told that the department is issuing a consular warning to travelers advising them not to visit this country. 
although we have no diplomatic presence in this country, i believe our minister was there about a week ago. 
at his own risk, probably, he has met with various parties in order to clearly state canada's position, which is in favor of respecting and strengthening the peace accord and maintaining the un presence. 
i believe that is it.  
it was decided to maintain the presence of the peacekeepers. 
i am told that now there are more of them there than anywhere else in the world. 
i am also told that reinforcements will be dispatched there to deal with the personal security problems mentioned by the senator.  
honorable senators, i do not know enough about the situation in sierra leone to compare it to former hot spots around the world, but i do know that the situation there is very serious. 
the ministry of foreign affairs is following it closely. 
it is to be hoped that the united nations forces will be strengthened there and that they can return to their role of peacekeeping rather than dealing with the present situation, which is far from peaceful.  
senator andreychuk:
honorable senators, i cannot think of a more desperate situation than that of sierra leone. 
children lose limbs every day. 
it's frightening. 
in this war, children act as soldiers. 
it is certain that the reinforcement of the peacekeeping forces and the sending of other peacekeepers will not be enough, given the poor functioning of the control and command structures there. 
if human security means anything in the world, it must have meaning not only in europe, but also in the whole world.  
what is the government's position on using the theme of human security to do something creative and different in sierra leone? 
for example, this question is related to diamonds. 
in angola, canada has taken a good initiative in calling for an immediate end to the illegal diamond trade. 
what is the canadian government doing, which has placed itself at the forefront of human security, in sierra leone today?  
senator boudreau:
honorable senators, with respect to the situation in sierra leone, as i have said before, the government of canada is responsible for supporting the efforts of the united nations. 
it is very important that the united nations efforts are successful in this theater. 
it is not the business of one country. 
we support the efforts of the united nations. 
the composition of the united nations force is an issue that has been determined by the united nations, presumably in consultation with canada as one of the world leaders in peacekeeping efforts, but our presence does not was not required in this way in this theater. 
however, we will do what we can. 
i understand that 700 or 800 british troops have arrived at the scene and it is hoped that they will strengthen personal security, at least around the capital.  
i believe that the efforts are going in this direction.  
the other issue the honorable senator raised concerns the trade implications of any action the government of sierra leone might take. 
this is an issue on which efforts to seek a solution will no doubt continue. 
in fact, it is believed that the conflict worsened when united nations troops approached the source of the diamonds.  
the united nations 
government support for the center for victims of torture 
the honorable a. raynell andreychuk:
honorable senators, would the government be prepared not only to show leadership in the united nations security council to do something without delay about the situation in sierra leone, but also to consider strengthening its commitment to the center? united nations for victims of torture?  
we have had meetings on landmines and i fully support canada's initiative in this regard because of the innocent people, especially children, who are killed or maimed by these devices. 
the mutilations that still occur today leave physical and psychological consequences that will be felt for a long time on this continent and in the world. 
the last time i checked, canada was providing $ 30,000 to the center for victims of torture. 
not only do i call on the government to act immediately on the situation in sierra leone, but i also ask the leader if the government is prepared to consider a long-term commitment to be able to provide effective assistance to affected children.  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
honorable senators, i will of course pass on senator andreychuk's questions on these two subjects, namely united nations activities and assistance to victims of this conflict, to the minister, and i will ask him to answer them.  
health 
the reaction to growing demand 
the honorable donald h. oliver:
honorable senators, my question is for the leader of the government in the senate. 
a new study from ims health canada, a health information group, says if the trend revealed by recent statistics on the use of health services by baby boomers continues, the costs of health services will rise markedly as this group ages. 
according to ims, baby boomers, that is, canadians aged 40 to 49, who make up 27% of the population. 100 of the population account for 52%. 100% of the increase of 22 million doctor visits in 1999.
how will the government meet the demand for prescription drugs from an aging population with increasing drug use? 
what happens to the national pharmacare program that the government proposed in 1993? is this plan still part of the government's strategy to revitalize health care and, if not, has the government planned any replacement measures to meet the increased demand?  
the honorable j. bernard boudreau (leader of the government):
the honorable senator raises an interesting question. 
during the two years that i did not assume public office, i participated in an activity related to health. 
i attended a major conference in toronto at which the minister of health and the president of the ontario medical association made a joint presentation - which in itself is quite an achievement. 
they placed two graphics side by side. 
the first graph showed the huge increase in annual costs per person, from a certain age. 
this graph was divided according to various demographic categories, for example, the age groups zero to 30, 30 to 45, 45 to 60, and 60 and over.  
the second graph presented demographic data on the canadian population - this is where there is a high concentration of individuals. 
this group of people is aging and it will soon be very expensive.  
the concern raised by the honorable senator is very legitimate. 
i am glad the honorable senator raised this issue.  
how will the governments of canada deal with this reality? 
they will certainly have to commit funds. 
over time, we will need to commit additional resources to the system to resolve the issue. 
however, the solution is not just monetary. 
when you look at the two graphs, you see very quickly that it is impossible to inject money into the system fast enough to solve the problem of this high concentration of people.  
the provinces and the federal government will be discussing these issues very soon. 
in fact, there is already talk of another meeting of ministers of health, which would be followed, at some point, by a meeting of first ministers. 
this is the kind of question to ask. 
the solution is not necessarily limited to injecting funds into the canada health and social transfer. 
there needs to be a much closer examination of the problem. 
i think governments will have to put aside political bigotry to solve this problem, which affects all governments in canada and is probably the most important challenge we have to face.  
senator oliver:
honorable senators, in giving this answer, is the minister saying that the government has earmarked more money to address this problem in its current health care revitalization strategy?  
senator boudreau:
honorable senators, the short answer to that question is that additional funds have been provided. 
however, as we move forward on this file, i can predict that all governments will need to increase their commitments.  
[ later ] 
distinguished visitors 
his honor the speaker pro tempore:
honorable senators, before i move on to another speaker, i would like to introduce mr. robert sturdy, who is in our gallery with his wife, elizabeth. 
mr. sturdy is chairman of the european parliament delegation for relations with canada. 
he is in canada to participate in a workshop on food safety, organized by the canada-europe parliamentary association.  
mr sturdy, we look forward to forming a close friendship with the european parliament. 
welcome to the senate of canada.  
agenda 
the work of the senate 
the honorable dan hays (deputy leader of the government):
honorable senators, i first want to call clause 4 under "government business", resuming debate on bill c-20, which was adjourned in the name of senator pitfield.  
bill giving effect to the requirement for clarity formulated by the supreme court of canada in its opinion on the reference on the secession of quebec 
second reading-debate continued 
the agenda calls for: 
resuming debate on the motion of the honorable senator boudreau, pc, seconded by the honorable senator hays, for the second reading of bill c-20, an act to give effect to the requirement for clarity formulated by the supreme court of canada in its opinion on the reference on the secession of quebec.  
the honorable p. michael pitfield:
honorable senators, i intended to speak at length on this legislation today. 
unfortunately, however, health issues prevented me from completing the work i am preparing for you with the quality standards that i value and deserve.  
my point of order now is to apologize for the delay and ask you to be patient as i continue to prepare myself so that you can present my speech to you next thursday instead of today.  
the issues we are discussing are very complex and, moreover, they are not new. 
for reasons like this, they do not affect just one person or organization within our government system, nor even a single period of time. 
on the contrary, they affect each and every one of us, those to come as well as those who have already left us, and that is why it is so important and appropriate to submit them to a parliamentary committee. 
the government seems prepared to address the role of the house of commons in a flexible and subtle manner. 
i think everyone will be happy about it. 
i would be surprised if he did not also look at the role of the senate from the same perspective.  
i am concerned that the committee, like many others in recent years, will find itself forced to accept material that is not even at the first year level. 
as i consider it essential that the work we have in front of us be well done, i ask you to give me the time to present this material to you. 
the government did not have much to say about the representation of interests related to regionalism, individual rights and diversity in the constitution. 
all these questions are interrelated. 
i am convinced that a properly reformed senate, drawn from its extraordinary isolation, could be useful, as an institution, in supporting and strengthening our constitutional objectives. 
we should certainly be able to bring these questions to our committee.  
honorable senators, i find it essential that these issues be considered and studied very carefully. 
this file touches on national sovereignty and the functions of the senate as a national institution. 
these are very strong arguments with which the government must come to terms.  
with your patience and understanding, honorable senators, i am confident that we can carry out this responsibility.  
the honorable dan hays (deputy leader of the government):
honorable senators, following the comments made by our distinguished colleague on the point of order, we will be happy to hear what he has to say to us next thursday.  
the honorable melvin perry poirier:
honorable senators, i am pleased to rise to speak in the debate on bill c-20. several speakers in this chamber have made their voices heard on this issue by approaching this bill from all angles.  
several focused their intervention on the role that the senate is called upon to play in assessing the clarity of the question and the referendum majority. 
i think that this role is not negligible since the house of commons will take into consideration the official resolutions or declarations of the senate on this issue.  
for my part, i will limit my intervention to the legitimacy of the bill and the crucial need it meets.  
honorable senators, for at least 35 years, canadian public life, and quebec political life in particular, has been marked by the constant threat of secession from quebec. 
there are different ways to respond to this threat. 
i will be allowed to state four.  
some say that we must fulfill all the desires of quebec ultra-nationalists, in order to keep them satisfied within canada. 
the major problem with this approach is that it inevitably leads to political and constitutional escalation, since there is no way to satisfy the nationalists at all costs.  
others suggest starting a new round of constitutional negotiations, ignoring the lack of receptiveness to this type of debate across the country. 
the dilemma of this formula is very obvious, since we still have in mind the failures of this approach in the past.  
still others suggest doing nothing at all, given the little tangible support for a truly separatist option in public opinion. 
for my part, i see it as the worst possible avenue. 
on the contrary, i believe that the government of canada must be prepared for any eventuality, which brings us to the fourth way of approaching the separatist problem in quebec.  
this is the approach taken by the government of canada.  
i don't need to plead for long to bring out the relevance of such an approach. 
the survival of a country is the most fundamental question on which a people can have to decide. 
the requirement for clarity is therefore self-evident.  
the referendums of 1980 and 1995 showed that the separatist leaders of quebec will stop at nothing and are ready to resort to any stratagem to rally the majority to their option. 
this aspect of the debate has already been studied at length. 
so i won't dwell on it today. 
we must not forget that it was the tricks of the pq government that prompted us to act to ensure that quebecers do not lose their country, canada, unless they make it clear that this is what they want. .  
honorable senators, i wonder what the opponents of this bill can expect from us and how they view the role of government. 
it goes without saying that our country is close to our hearts and that we would renounce our responsibilities if we neglected to ensure the clarity of the referendum process. 
the first to complain about it would be quebeckers, and they would be right.  
by choosing this path, the government of canada is in no way harming quebecers and is not depriving them of any rights. 
the text of the opinion also specifies that it is up to political actors to determine what is a clear majority and a clear question. 
the government of canada being, beyond any doubt, one of these actors, it has a responsibility to ensure that it would only enter into such negotiations if it considers that the question and the majority allow the conclusion to be drawn. desire of the people of a province to secede from canada.  
the government of canada is not enthusiastic about passing this legislation. 
there are many other issues that must also hold its attention, but, as i mentioned earlier, few issues are more fundamental than the very survival of a country.  
we owe it to all canadians, to those who came before us and to those who will succeed us, to make sure that this country is not broken up by misunderstanding or partisan political maneuvering.  
certainly there has been some criticism of the bill. 
it was argued, for example, that there was no need to legislate, that the opinion of the supreme court was sufficient. 
i do not share that opinion, honorable senators.  
the government had a duty to give effect to the opinion of the supreme court and to equip us with the means to guarantee that the approach adopted by the pq government complied with all the requirements of a democracy concerned with the rule of law. 
bill c-20 responds to this search for clarity, clarity which is essential to the proper functioning of democracy.  
honorable senators, this government is betting on clarity. 
we are comfortable with this approach. 
on the one hand, because it is necessary in all logic and, on the other hand, because we are convinced that, in the clear, quebecers will never give up on canada.  
this is indicated by all the opinion polls, which show that a clear and unmistakable question is worth little support for the separation of quebec. 
on the contrary, a confused question, which appeals for example to the notions of association or partnership, generates a more pronounced support in favor of the sovereignists. 
this is a trend that has been observed since the creation of the independence movement in quebec.  
it was also argued that the bill would only rekindle the flame of nationalism in quebec. 
however, it is important to define what is meant by nationalism, honorable senators.  
the notion of nationalism, as it exists in quebec, does not necessarily go hand in hand with separatism. 
many quebec leaders have expressed a healthy nationalism which has been a factor of change, without advocating the separation of quebec.  
above all, we trust the judgment of quebeckers. 
we are convinced that, if a third referendum on sovereignty were to be imposed on them, quebecers, clearly, would reject the path of rupture.  
for all these considerations, honorable senators, i support bill c-20. we do not pretend to believe that it will solve the question of national unity on its own, but we do believe that it constitutes a great step forward, by emphasizing the democratic heritage that quebeckers share with other canadians.
the honorable marcel prud'homme:
honorable senators, would senator perry poirier take a few questions?  
senator perry poirier:
okay.  
senator prud'homme:
would the honorable senator not agree that there is not only a committee to study this question, but that we could also consider having this senate committee travel across canada? 
if we were to pass the bill as it is, we would take the senate out of the discussion process. 
is one committee sufficient to study this issue? 
given the importance of the subject being discussed, would it not be appropriate for this committee to travel across canada to fully understand and grasp the full scope of this very important bill?  
senator perry poirier:
honorable senators, i believe senator prud'homme has a very good idea. 
a committee that traveled across canada from coast to coast might answer the question more easily than a single committee sitting in ottawa.  
the honorable nicholas w. taylor:
honorable senators, i believe most of my colleagues on this side realize that i will not be supporting bill c-20. i will indeed speak against bill c-20.
having had to be out of the country for the past few weeks, i was sent the debates and continued to learn about the subject. 
i believe i am the first representative from the west to speak to the bill. 
i would add, however, that all too often when you throw a rock into water, i mean in this place, the lapping is only heard in ottawa. 
we must not forget - and this is why i support the clarity part of the bill - that there are separatists in alberta. 
indeed, they had formed the second largest party in the early 1980s. 
albertans are starting to be quite wealthy, and it is a well-known fact that most wealthy people tend to run away with their money and build a wall around their fortune. 
the concept of separatism may not be dead forever.  
honorable senators, i would like to commend the government for considering a bill on clarity or on the conditions for separating a province. 
i fully embrace this idea. 
i find that this process is flawed since the senate is excluded from it. 
this is a fundamental flaw in bill c-20, a fatal mistake.  
honorable senators, we can analyze whether or not the senate should play a role in the bill, looking at the political side and the legal side. 
let's first look at the legal aspect. 
in their interventions, the leader of the government in the senate and later senator fraser spoke about the fact that it would be up to the supreme court and the political actors, or elected officials, to decide. 
i then had a brief conversation with the minister responsible in the other place and asked him why the senate had been excluded. 
he replied sharply that it was because if we had not been, the supreme court would have declared the law ultra vires, illegal. 
after continuing my research and talking to the researchers, i concluded that if we are in trouble, it is because of a researcher who did not know how to distinguish between a political actor and an elected representative.  
coming from alberta, i must admit that it is easy to confuse actors and elected representatives. 
however, such a mistake should not be made when it comes to researching legislation. 
in other words, if the term "political actors" had been defined correctly, as it should have been at the start, i do not think the senate would have been excluded.  
i prefer, coming from the west and having breathed the healthy air of the rockies, to think that this is actually a mistake rather than a deliberate act.  
honorable senators, from there we can look at the issue of the senate and the regional vote.  
in the senate, however, quebec and ontario will still be limited to less than 50%. if there is a bulwark against the dictatorship of the majority, it is the senate.
in the areas of religion, race and resources, the senate is there.  
we can say that, in this case, we are only talking about a province. 
the point is, when you open a door, you never know how far it will go.  
i will quote from senator fraser's speech on page 914 of the debates of the senate on march 30. 
senator fraser is the chair of our caucus, an extremely intelligent person. 
she said: 
i am, however, deeply touched by the argument that the purpose of bill c-20, the government's approach to a possible secession of a province from canada, is another such issue. , something which is so fundamentally political, so intimately and directly linked to the will of the people, that it also falls into this small but very important category where it is the house of commons, and not parliament as a whole, that must make the decision and, of course, take responsibility for it.  
we are getting closer to sedition. 
this is a very dangerous policy, fact. 
do you understand that senator fraser is not only the chair of our caucus, but that her speech was probably scrutinized by the prime minister's office? 
she didn't just talk about this issue; she spoke of authority.  
senator fraser could very well deny that and she will have a chance to ask a question in a moment. 
she is, in my opinion, a very important person whose opinion i closely follow.  
i have to ask what is happening here. 
are these things so fundamentally and intimately linked that they have to be done by the house of commons? 
will it be indigenous rights another time? 
what about those of you from the maritimes and the west? 
what if it was a question of a national energy policy?  
voices:
senator taylor:
suppose, for example, in newfoundland and nova scotia that the house of commons decides to demand a national energy policy when the world price of oil is at $ 80 a barrel. 
they could demand a change to the constitution. 
they might decide that they made a stupid mistake in putting the responsibility for resources on the people of the maritimes and the west. 
what if they say they have to change the situation through a bill, but the issue is so important that they would rather not ask the senate for the point of view? this subject?  
let's go a little further. 
suppose the question of indigenous languages   arises in the high arctic. 
what if the house of commons decides, for the good of the country, not to shield northern businesses from invasion by southern businesses by putting the language in a kind of straitjacket? artificial and that it decrees to be the only one to pronounce on this question?  
voices:
senator taylor:
from there, everything basically looks like a race. 
what is supposed to stop them?  
i have just returned from an interparliamentary conference which took place in jordan. 
the israelis, the arabs and the iranians were all arguing within their different racial groups.
we have to realize that we are lucky in canada to live in a society that is almost non-racial. 
why is this so? 
because that's how we present it. 
it is not just that we were born under favorable skies that we don't have a lot of prejudices. 
in fact, my view of humanity is so bleak that i believe we don't have prejudices because we don't have enough power to prevail over others, so we all have to get along.  
a voice:
i agree with you.  
voices:
well done!  
senator taylor:
that being said, why should we turn around in this bill and give a majority house, which only needs the agreement of ontario and quebec, the right to trample on everyone's rights? others?  
the senate exists for good reason. 
we should think very carefully before we vote on any resolution that excludes the senate from the process. 
with this precedent, it would be very easy for the house of commons to decide that it can run the country on its own. 
there was no need to introduce a bill in this case. 
they could have passed a resolution in their own chamber. 
they didn't have to show up here and ask us to sign our death warrant.  
senator prud'homme:
well done!  
senator taylor:
for some reason, there is a repository of "wisdom" among us who believes that an elected majority of two provinces can never be wrong. 
i don't believe it.  
before i sit down again, i would like to talk about strategy.  
senator prud'homme:
senator taylor:
honorable senators, i do not see where i went wrong, but if senator prud'homme cheers me on with his applause, i will have to read my remarks again.  
in terms of strategy, the liberal party is without a doubt the only party in the house of commons to demand a majority over 50%. 100 of the votes plus one.
it demands a majority of sixty-six and two-thirds percent.  
what do you think will happen if a minority government is elected in the next election? 
the matter before us today will not even get to the senate. 
the senate will be the only one left to demand more than a 50% majority. 100 of the votes plus one to legitimize a final separation.  
let us suppose, terror of terror, that this party from the west emerges, which was almost nothing a year ago. 
people giggled when i warned them about the reform party. 
this political formation started from almost nothing and gained a lot of speed at the end of last year. 
we can now almost hear the sound of galloping ...  
senator cools:
but he is a poet!  
senator taylor: - and a loud frankie lane shout, as stockwell days, preston manning and joe clark pace the country. 
one of them could become prime minister. 
it's possible. 
we see funny things in a democracy. 
those of us who believe in the two-thirds rule would then be very grateful if the senate stepped in, facing the house of commons and its 50% majority. 100 of the votes plus one.  
the strategy behind this bill baffles me. 
in closing, i do not think we should send this bill to committee because it has serious flaws. 
it is a bad bill.  
the prime minister and the drafters of the bill should put aside their pride and recognize that the idea of   dismissing the senate, let alone the rest of the bill, was based on the erroneous conclusion of researchers who mistook politicians for elected representatives. 
one need only watch question period in the other place to realize how easy it is to do.  
some say that senators are appointed to approve ex officio what the prime minister says. 
there is something contradictory here. 
i like to think that i was appointed here in part for my spirit of independence.  
voices:
well done!  
senator taylor:
in turn, i do not think i was appointed to preside over the dissolution of the senate.  
voices:
well done!  
the honorable john g. bryden:
would senator taylor take a question?  
senator taylor:
i gladly accept a question from senator bryden.  
senator bryden:
honorable senators, that speech was excellent, whether we agree with the substance or not, and i would even say courageous. 
i congratulate the senator.  
the main concern of the senator was to explain that one of the senate's most useful roles was to ensure the protection of minorities and regions of canada. 
senator taylor:
yes, honorable senators, i knew that. 
i thank senator bryden for pointing that out. 
that is probably what explains why senators will have their chance. 
if the oil and gas reserves turn out to be as large as some suggest, many people will come to halifax to kiss my colleague's ring.  
the honorable joan fraser:
honorable senators, may senator taylor allow me to reassure him a little. 
he indicated that my comments earlier on this bill may have been verified by the prime minister's office.  
his honor the speaker pro tempore:
honorable senators, i regret having to interrupt senator fraser, but the 15 minutes have expired. 
would senator taylor like to ask for an extension?  
senator taylor:
honorable senators, i ask for a question period.  
his honor the speaker pro tempore:
is that okay, honorable senators?  
voices:
okay.  
senator fraser:
honorable senators, perhaps senator taylor would be reassured to know that my remarks have not been reviewed by anyone. 
no one outside my office knew what i was going to say about this bill. 
maybe some people would have liked to have some control over my words, but they didn't. 
what i said was only my own thinking, which covered many of the points raised by senator taylor.  
senator taylor:
honorable senators, i am relieved to hear senator fraser's comments, although i must admit that i am a little surprised at her recklessness. 
when i read the presentation in question, as i said, i found it so politically colored that, as a good son of a farmer in the west, it scared me immensely.  
the honorable noel a. kinsella (deputy leader of the opposition):
honorable senators, i too have a question for senator taylor. 
in view of the realpolitik in effect in this chamber and in this city, and in view of what i might consider approval of the fact that we currently have a historic challenge as senators to achieve, maintain and protect the he integrity of this chamber and its consent, what kind of amendment does the honorable senator think we could propose to allow for the kind of acceptability that the government would need?
what kind of amendment could we propose, we who support the main principles of the bill but who nevertheless have reservations about certain parts of this bill, such as the question of the role of the senate, that may be acceptable? for the government and allow it to understand that it is only the integrity of our bicameral system that is in question? 
do we have to consider a timing amendment, in other words providing that the senate would not delay consideration of the clarity of the question? 
is the honorable senator of the opinion that the government would accept an amendment proposing a joint committee of the house of commons and the senate to examine the clarity of the question? 
what kind of help is the honorable senator prepared to give on this particular issue?  
senator taylor:
honorable senators, i have not drafted an amendment because, as the honorable senator said, there are other matters besides the role of the senate. 
one thing that has always impressed me, and sometimes amazed me, is how well the committee system works in the senate. 
i have always believed that a camel, for example, was a cow that had gone bad after it came to the senate. 
in general, however, it seems that the committees here are doing a good job. 
so i think it would be a good idea to refer an issue like this to one of our committees for study.  
speaking of committees, i'm a little disappointed that we're talking about creating a new committee. 
when we change committees in this way, we send the public the message that we are manipulating the process a little and we also set a precedent for future situations. 
if we have an agriculture committee that is against the canadian wheat board, we set up another committee that is in favor of the canadian wheat board. 
if we have a foreign affairs committee that is against nato, we set up another committee that is favorable to nato. 
it can go on like this without end. 
when you start to set up new committees, some people start to fear that you will try to get the answer right away rather than having the committee look at it.  
i do not sit on the standing senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs, but i know there are real tigers on both sides, and i think that is very good.  
the honorable anne c. cools:
honorable senators, would senator taylor please answer another question?  
senator taylor:
certainly.  
senator cools:
honorable senators, i am sure that senator taylor is well informed, like most of us, of mr. stephane dion's attitude towards the senate. 
i am sure he has read in the press, as i have on numerous occasions, that mr. dion believes that the senate should be abolished. 
this is no secret, and we made no attempt to hide it. 
no attempt was made to draw attention to party loyalty, to the constitution of the senate or to its history.  
unless i'm mistaken, that was when mr. dion made his famous statement: "my country comes before my party." 
does senator taylor remember that statement?  
senator taylor:
i remember.  
senator cools:
they have been quoted all over the country. 
they have even been cited in this house. 
he said: "my country comes before my party."  
since i do not believe that mr. dion would discuss this bill with me, could the honorable senator tell me whether mr. dion's "my country comes before my party" applies to senators from the liberal party?  
senator taylor:
i don't know if the country comes before my party, but it actually seems like a good policy. 
my kind-hearted old grandmother said she always voted for the person. 
when i asked her who she voted for, she invariably voted for the conservative party candidate because she had never found another person who was worth voting for. 
you could argue that a good party does what the country wants, so it always seems like the country comes first. 
i believe it should be.  
as for mr. dion, i am aware of his past. 
i met him once. 
we know each other very well, him and me. 
we attended the calgary stampede together. 
it creates connections that eastern canadians may not be able to understand. 
it's not quite like cutting our fingers and mixing our bloods, but it does bond with watching animals being tortured. 
riding a bull obviously appeals to any politician.  
it was mr. dion who said he believed that the supreme court would have declared the bill inadmissible if it had not made room for it in the senate, assuming of course that the elected representatives should decide the issue. 
i believe this whole debate about the senate is based on a mistake. 
a pen error has resulted in a misinterpretation.  
i haven't seen him since. 
i certainly heard him say that he believed the bill would be illegal in the eyes of the supreme court if it left the senate in its normal position.  
this leads to two questions. 
i know that senator cools does not like the supreme court any more than i do. 
the supreme court could rule, as it did in the lobster case, and redefine what a political actor is. 
i do not know if we will ask the court to rule on what a political actor is. 
the point is that, for now, mr. dion's researchers have interpreted the decision as referring only to elected officials.  
senator cools:
honorable senators, many of us who have read the supreme court's decision have been shocked by the lack of clarity and precision in the judgment itself. 
of course, the courts write about the powers of parliament, prime ministers and enacting laws. 
it is incredible that such an imprecise and vague expression was used by accident.  
senator taylor alluded to the question i asked earlier. 
my secretary, who follows the electronic broadcast of our proceedings from her desk downstairs, sent me the newspaper article that i just handed over from a page. 
this is an article by joan bryden, which appeared in the sunday, march 22, 1998 edition of the montreal gazette. 
here is an excerpt: 
[...] the minister of intergovernmental affairs, stephane dion, who received the longest and most spontaneous ovation for the shortest answer.  
"my country comes before my party," dion would have simply replied to a delegate who asked why the government did not protest when charest, leader of the "fifth party" was portrayed as the champion of federalism.  
we may not resolve it here, but we could put it to mr. dion when he appears before us.  
the honorable charlie watt:
honorable senators, with respect to bill c-20, i would like to raise an issue of prime importance. 
i speak to honorable senators today as a senator and as an inuit.  
the issue i am referring to has not been given sufficient consideration by the house of commons. 
this is the pressing need to ensure that the indigenous peoples of canada, especially those in the province contemplating secession, can participate directly in any possible negotiations leading to secession. 
i therefore urge the senate to amend bill c-20 to specifically include aboriginal peoples as direct participants.  
the natives who, like me, live in quebec, know that the threat of secession from quebec is very real. 
as an article that appeared on the front page of the gazette on may 8, the quebec government is currently launching a major offensive in favor of quebec sovereignty. 
in this regard, premier lucien bouchard declared: "our objective, our obsession, is the sovereignty of quebec as soon as possible."  
in addition, in the latest version of its bill 99, the quebec government seeks to deny aboriginal peoples the status of distinct people. 
we are forced to identify ourselves as part of a single quebec people. 
we deny our rights to self-identification and self-determination. 
in a possible quebec referendum on secession, our voice will be stifled. 
the actions of the quebec government are a serious violation of our human rights.  
over the years, the indigenous peoples of quebec have contributed immensely to the debate on secession. 
we have held our own referendums to express our democratic will to remain on our traditional territory in canada. 
we participated as interveners in the references on the secession of quebec. 
many of us are continuing our efforts to ensure that quebec does not separate from canada.  
yet our efforts and our positions are weakened by the actions of the federal government. 
i am referring here to the inability of bill c-20 to ensure the participation of aboriginal peoples in any possible negotiations on secession. 
we have lived and governed ourselves for thousands of years in what is now known as canada, yet we are denied equal and respectful treatment.  
during the debate in the house of commons on bill c-20 at third reading stage, the minister of intergovernmental affairs, stephane dion, confirmed that section 35.1 of the constitution act, 1982 establishes a binding principle . 
this principle obliges the federal and provincial governments to invite aboriginal peoples to participate in discussions regarding any constitutional amendment affecting us. 
mr. dion claims that bill c-20 respects this principle since it does not limit future negotiations on secession to the federal and provincial governments.  
mr. dion acknowledges that the government has not expressly included indigenous peoples in bill c-20 as participants in any future negotiations on secession. 
he believes that the bill should not go "beyond the opinion of the court by creating an obligation for actors other than those to whom it has assigned" the obligation to negotiate secession. 
with respect to indigenous peoples, that argument simply does not hold water.  
first, our participation in constitutional negotiations is already expressly provided for in section 35.1 of the constitution act, 1982. 
second, the james bay and northern quebec agreement and other treaties with the aboriginal peoples of quebec cannot be amended without the consent of the aboriginal people. 
this fact strengthens the position of indigenous peoples as distinct "political actors" who must participate fully and directly in any future negotiations on secession.  
third, it is ridiculous for the federal government to say that it did not include aboriginal peoples among the participants because it did not want to impose an obligation on us to negotiate secession. 
indigenous peoples have always said that we must represent ourselves and participate directly in any negotiations on secession. 
the government has a fiduciary duty to act in accordance with our constitutional will, rights and status.  
it is unacceptable that the federal and provincial governments are expressly included in bill c-20 as participants in any future negotiations on secession and that aboriginal peoples are left out. 
in accordance with the principles of democracy, federalism and the protection of indigenous and treaty rights, bill c-20 must be amended so that indigenous peoples are included as direct participants in future negotiations on secession. . 
today i am presenting to you the amendments that will enable us to achieve this objective. 
these amendments fully comply with the spirit and the letter of the supreme court opinion and the canadian constitution. 
in addition, they fully respect treaty rights, aboriginal rights and other human rights enjoyed by aboriginal people.  
the senate of canada was created so that regions and peoples who could not otherwise be heard have a voice. 
this is the chamber of sober second thought. 
therefore, i urge honorable senators to amend bill c-20. the senate should not participate in acts of exclusion of aboriginal people like those which have marked the history of canada.
in fact, the senate should not facilitate the division of the country by weakening the position of aboriginal peoples in the context of the secession of quebec.  
i would like these proposed amendments to be considered in committee rather than in the senate.  
the honorable lowell murray:
does the honorable senator think that without the consent of the aboriginals, the relationship between the aboriginal peoples of quebec and the federal crown and the federal parliament could be changed? 
senator watt:
honorable senators, the government of canada or the provinces, individually or jointly, do not have the power to make this decision without consulting aboriginal peoples.  
senator murray:
honorable senators, i was not just talking about consultation. 
as our colleague pointed out during his speech, one might think that paragraph 35.1 guarantees consultation. 
i was asking whether, under the constitution, aboriginal peoples can be removed without their consent from the jurisdiction of the federal crown and the federal parliament. 
this is a question we might want to ask the government at some point.  
senator watt:
honorable senators, i will explain to you why the responsibility of aboriginal peoples cannot simply be transferred from the federal government to a provincial government. 
article 35 of the constitution is clear: when the status of indigenous peoples needs to be changed, the indigenous people must be consulted and they must give their consent.  
more importantly, the only agreement between the federal government and the government of quebec is the james bay and northern quebec agreement, which was signed in 1975. 
this text is generally referred to as a modern treaty. 
any modification of the constitution would have numerous repercussions on this text. 
for this reason, it is important that indigenous peoples are direct participants in any negotiation regarding secession.  
senator prud'homme:
honorable senators, i always listen with great interest to anything relating to the future of canada. 
i am afraid there is a certain lack of sensitivity about what canada is. 
i have seen this in the seven years that i have been in the senate and i have seen it often in the house of commons.  
it is one of the rare occasions that we have to demonstrate why the senate was created. 
we had a great opportunity when it came to the promise to the people of newfoundland that their school system would never be changed. 
democracy forced us to deny the rights of the people who united in canada in 1949. 
at least we had a long debate. 
i had urged the senate to go to newfoundland, and it has been done. 
i believe the senate has fulfilled its role.  
senator watt states that he intends to propose an amendment, but that he would prefer to do so in committee rather than here. 
i am afraid that the study in committee will not yield anything. 
i don't want to prejudge the results, but we can already see from the list of members approached to serve on the committee that those who are selected will not be in the mood to accept amendments. 
maybe it's unfair, but that's the impression i get.  
would it not therefore be wiser for senator watt to move his amendments here? 
if he decides to do so, but the speaker decides that, since he has finished his speech, he cannot, perhaps the senator could convince a colleague who has not yet spoken to move these amendments at second reading so that the senate can adopt or reject them. 
senator watt would then have the opportunity to propose them again before the committee.  
they don't want us to interfere with what they have already decided.  
honorable senators know that the early canadians were close to my heart. 
we tend to forget them, but i don't forget them. 
i have always taken them into account. 
i changed my conception of canada when i began to meet people like senators watt and chalifoux and people from across canada.  
senator watt:
i am grateful to senator prud'homme for his interest in the matter and his sincerity and i thank him for not wanting me to miss an opportunity to highlight the amendments.  
senator prud'homme also spoke about what is close to his heart and the need to exercise reflection and understanding and restore the respect which is often completely absent.  
i am also counting very much on the members of our committee to study this matter very seriously. 
they will have a lot more time to thoroughly explore this issue. 
i hope it will also be informative for the house of commons and for all canadians, because sometimes they need to be informed.  
that is why, rather than doing what senator prud'homme suggests i do, i will trust the committee that will study the issue. 
however, if nothing happens to this committee, i do not think that i will be able to prevent me from presenting these amendments at third reading stage. 
so if the committee chooses not to present the amendments, i would still have the opportunity to do so.  
senator prud'homme:
honorable senators, i am satisfied with the response. 
sometimes i think we are afraid to say that we are satisfied with the answers given. so i am very satisfied in this case.  
sometimes i sit on a committee dealing with a very sensitive issue with senators who, as i have noticed, will sit on that committee. 
their sense of fairness and honesty was very evident then. 
i see one in particular who sat on the special committee on veterans affairs. 
of course, it will all depend on whether the bill goes to committee, and we are not there yet.  
his honor the speaker pro tempore:
senator cools, i regret to inform you that your speaking time has expired. 
are you requesting an extension?  
senator cools:
honorable senators, i have a short question.  
his honor the speaker pro tempore:
honorable senators, is leave granted?  
voices:
okay.  
senator cools:
i thank senator watt for raising what i consider to be important issues for our first nations. 
he said he would defer to the committee. 
if the committee does not propose the amendment it wishes, it will propose it itself at third reading stage.  
the task that awaits senator watt is quite difficult. 
the first thing to do would be to invite the committee to study the issues it has raised so that the committee can consider making the desired amendments.  
is senator watt considering asking the committee to study the effects of bill c-20 on the james bay treaty and other first nations issues?  
senator watt:
i thank senator cools for his question. 
i have spoken personally with senators who have said that they will become members of the committee. 
i did not speak with all of them, but with some of them. 
i always hear how important this issue is to other members of the committee when it is formed.  
(on motion of senator joyal, debate adjourned.)  
bill on the modernization of certain benefit and obligation regimes 
second reading 
the agenda calls for: 
resuming debate on the motion of the honorable senator pepin, seconded by the honorable senator maheu, for the second reading of bill c-23, an act to modernize the system of benefits and obligations in the acts from canada.  
the honorable anne c. cools:
honorable senators, i rise to participate in the debate on bill c-23, an act to modernize the benefits and obligations regime in the statutes of canada.  
senator lucie pepin, who introduced bill c-23, began second reading debate a few days ago. 
responding to a question from senator fernand robichaud about members of the same family living together for economic reasons, senator pepin said, as we can read on page 1190 of hansard: 
you are right that it happens that several people from the same family live together and one member of the family is responsible for the other. 
however, after studying the obligations and importance of a similar bill, the government came to the conclusion that a completely different bill should be passed.  
honorable senators, senator pepin's answer to the question of economic dependence contrasts sharply with that of the minister of justice, anne mclellan, made a few years ago. 
on september 23, 1998, before the standing senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs studying bill c-37 to amend the judges act, she said that she and her department were examining the possibility of granting fringe benefits to all people with an economic dependency relationship. 
let me be very frank: our government has made it clear in this regard that it will examine each case on its merits. 
the court also said it would take a similar approach. 
however, i would remind honorable senators - and i say this in response to senator bryden - that we are doing political work that, eventually, will involve a fundamental change in the benefits that may be provided in canadian society, in at the very least, within federal jurisdiction, and that we don't want to limit ourselves to a discussion of same-sex or opposite-sex spouses; we want to look at a more legitimate question relating to canadian society, which is the question of true dependence.
once this work is done, as i have already indicated, we will come back to you and the house of commons to present an omnibus bill that will deal with the granting of benefits based on this dependency factor. 
this work is well underway and my colleagues and i will be talking about it in detail as of next week.  
honorable senators, at one point the minister abandoned the intention she had so stated in committee and switched to this method of providing benefits based on sex and sexual activity. 
i hope that the committee will address this issue during its study of bill c-23 and ask the minister how it is that she has changed her mind.  
honorable senators, last year the senate had before it bill c-78, an act to establish the public sector pension investment board. 
clause 75 of bill c-78 used the expression "in a conjugal-type relationship". 
i intervened in the debate here in the senate on june 16 and september 10, 1999. i spoke out against this expression and more specifically against the words "of the conjugal type". 
i am saddened to see that almost a year later the minister of justice has once again refused to take my advice and has failed to craft the bill satisfactorily to reflect its fundamental objectives . 
at the time, i had based my criticism largely on the activism of the courts and also on the risk that such a definition might present for marriage as a social and religious institution. 
i said at that time that the term "conjugal" was a separate term from matrimonial law.  
i sincerely believe, honorable senators, that the government has an obligation to balance these interests, and i also believe that it is entirely possible to draft and introduce a bill that can strike that balance.  
the government must stop fiddling with the words and legal meanings of "man", "woman", "husband", "wife", "marriage", "spouse" and now "conjugal". 
the legal manipulation of terms and definitions, which is so prevalent in courts and government, is cruel, one-sided and unnecessary, in addition to sowing division. 
the term "conjugal union" refers to marriage, and "marriage" means the union of a man and a woman.  
marriage was instituted for the consecration of the union between a man and a woman; for the procreation of children who will be brought up in the fear and love of god; and for companionship, the help and comfort that spouses must give to each other, both in prosperity and in adversity.  
this concept of marriage, honorable senators, has served humanity for a few hundred years now and, in my opinion, it should not be diminished or shaken. 
marriage as a social institution must absolutely be protected.  
honorable senators, i will now talk to you about the definitions of the word "conjugal" found in the dictionary and the first meaning of that word. 
i will also explain the origins of the word. 
the dictionary gives the following definition of the word "conjugal": 
relating to the union between husband and wife.  
the term conjugal derives from the latin word coniugalis or conjugalis since in latin the i replaces the j, which means relating to marriage. 
the main and manifest characteristic of a conjugal relationship is the commitment to beget, to have children from marriage. 
for centuries, law and jurisprudence have supported these principles. 
this proposed change is revolutionary and has never been supported in the past.  
honorable senators, the term conjugal is a term relating to marriage and absolutely cannot, from a legal point of view, be applied to erotic or sexual relations between homosexual persons. 
it is not as resilient legally, socially or biologically as the bill suggests. 
the dictionary defines the word conjugate and then the word conjugation. 
it defines the term conjugation in the field of grammar, botany, mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology. 
this term means what is commonly called rut, as in the expression rutting season. 
in the field of biology, the dictionary defines the term as the union or fusion of two cells for the purpose of reproduction.  
honorable senators, this morning at the national finance committee, we heard an excellent presentation from some employees of health canada. 
they were talking about the reproduction and development of mutations in viruses, the threat that our community will face and the need for vaccines and the like. 
in addition, this committee this morning discussed certain biological aspects of what is called "mixing of genetic material". 
it is important to understand the meaning of all this. 
in its biological acceptance, the new shorter oxford english dictionary tells us that "conjugation" is the union of two cells for the purpose of reproduction. 
in biology, "conjugation" means genetic recombination, the recombination of genetic material. 
this offspring is similar to its two parents since it is of the same species, but it has its own characteristics which make it a unique organism or person.  
honorable senators, the absolutely necessary condition for the genetic recombination of humans is the existence of two sexual types. 
you need two sexual types of the same species, and these two types must be different, that is, different from each other in their reproductive capacity and function. 
reproduction is not a legal process but a biological process.  
the two sexual types are, firstly, the genetic donor, generally described as male, male, and second, the genetic receptor, generally described as female, female. 
this is what genetic recombination is all about. 
it is the recombination of genetic material from a man and a woman. 
this necessarily means that biological conjugation, genetic recombination is impossible when the two organisms are of the same sexual type, a condition simply described as homosexuality, coming from the greek prefix homo and the word "sexual", therefore homosexual. 
homosexual relations cannot be conjugal in nature because they cannot lead to reproduction. 
both homosexuals, as the prefix homo indicates, belong to the same sexual type. 
therefore, homosexual, erotic and carnal relationships cannot be of a conjugal nature.  
honorable senators, i would now like to turn to clause 1.1 of bill c-23, which says: 
it is understood that the modifications made by this law do not change the meaning of the term "marriage", that is, the legitimate union of a man and a woman to the exclusion of any other person.  
this is an amendment that was made in the house of commons at the behest of minister mclellan herself. 
this amendment was introduced to show that the minister cared about marriage and to reassure canadians that bill c-23 will not affect the definition of marriage. 
honorable senators, this amendment will not appear in any of the dozens of statutes, 68 in all, that bill c-23 is to amend. 
these words will not appear in any of these amended statutes and will disappear altogether when bill c-23 is passed.  
mr. david brown, a lawyer with stikeman elliott in toronto, prepared a legal opinion on the principles of statutory interpretation in relation to bill c-23. 
regarding section 1.1, david brown points out that: 
in other words, section 1.1 is not an enactment provision of the bill; it does not amend any of the laws referred to in the bill by including a definition of the word "marriage".
passing a version of the bill containing section 1.1 will not legally result in the inclusion of the definition of "marriage" in any of the legislation in question. 
section 1.1 is not an enactment provision, it is simply an interpretive provision.  
honorable senators, i hope that the committee will seriously study bill c-23 and make certain improvements. 
i hope the committee will try to strike a balance between social interests in marriage and social interests in providing benefits to homosexuals.  
honorable senators, in the chamber, on may 2, last week, in response to my question to senator pepin, senator joyal stated, and it appears on page 1191 of the debates of the senate: 
the supreme court ruling in the case cited by senator pepin, and in particular justice cory, clearly defined what a conjugal relationship is.  
i ask the committee to look into this matter. 
my reading of the supreme court judgment in m. v. h. of 1999 brings me to a different conclusion - and i believe this is the case to which senator joyal was referring in his answer to my question to senator pepin.
it is true that justice cory did not mention the words "conjugal relationship", but the court did not define what a conjugal relationship is - the issue has not been resolved by any means. 
in fact, justice cory referred to these words in the obiter.  
in obituary, cory j. cited a lower court decision, molodowich v. penttinen heard in toronto district court in 1980.
i would point out that the molodowich case discussed conjugality in the context of heterosexual relationships. 
in the case of m. v. h., cory j. said at paragraph 59:
however, it has been recognized that these elements may be present to varying degrees and that not all of them are necessary for the union to be held to be conjugal. 
while it is true that the societal image of same-sex couples is not necessarily the subject of a consensus, we agree that they share many of the other "marital" characteristics. 
to be included in the definition, neither different-sex couples nor same-sex couples need to conform fully to the traditional matrimonial model in order to prove that their union is "conjugal".  
the molodowich v. penttinen made no mention of same-sex relationships.  
i hope the committee will look at this issue. 
i am sure many questions will follow then.  
honorable senators, i note that in m. v. h., the decision of mr. justice cory, supported by chief justice lamer and justices claire l'heureux-dube, beverly mclachlin, frank iacobucci and ian binnie, was not based on the fact that same-sex partners had a relationship. marital relationship but was instead based on the interpretation of the purpose of section 29 of the ontario family law act.
in a majority judgment, the judges concluded that the purpose of this section was to reduce the demands on the social assistance system.  
his honor the speaker:
i regret to have to interrupt the honorable senator cools, but his 15-minute period has expired.  
senator cools:
may i have leave to finish my speech, honorable senators?  
his honor the speaker:
is that okay, honorable senators?  
voices:
okay.  
senator cools:
they therefore concluded that it was discriminatory to exclude same-sex couples from the application of these provisions as this would allegedly be contrary to the purpose of the law. 
i hope the committee will shed light on what mr. justice cory actually said and the impact that will have on the judicial determination of the meaning of a conjugal relationship.  
honorable senators, i would like to quote a specific passage from the 1980 decision in molodowich v. pentiinen.
the judgment was rendered by mr. justice kurisko of the district court of ontario. 
here is what he said: 
the pursuit to obtain the restoration of conjugal rights corresponded to the execution of the very essence of the marriage contract, which recognizes from time immemorial that there must be cohabitation and conjugal rights.  
honorable senators, i sincerely believe that it is possible to be fair in our community and that it is truly possible to bring justice to all. 
maybe i'm a little naive, but in my opinion i don't really think so.  
my opposition to this bill stems from the particular use of the expression "conjugal relationship". 
i have always believed that we had refrained from passing laws based on lust and carnal activity. 
this is what i had always understood. 
in fact, very little legislation supports "sex" per se. 
i believe that a better way to prepare this bill would have been to use the traditional way of drafting bills and to act in a way that is consistent with our good traditions.  
the last thing i will say in closing concerns the origin of morality, the origin of marriage and the origin of the duties of spouses towards each other. 
i would have preferred that the benefits and obligations regime contemplated by bill c-23 be voluntary rather than based on a conjugal relationship based on sexuality.  
i have tried to quickly go through some material i have on the origins of morality - a very complex and very broad question. 
what we do know is that primitive morality made its appearance at the very beginning of human moral life. 
as we know, in animals there is no morality, but rather the elements that allow intelligence to shape morality in humans. 
the only knowledge we have of primitive thought comes from relics and folklore describing primitive ways of thinking. 
some of these ways of thinking have been perpetuated in folklore and in the superstitious practices of peoples.  
it is important to understand that morality and the law began to build around what would be called the basic needs of human beings. 
honorable senators, the basic human need and the basic need to be met was the need for survival and preservation of the race. 
marriage has always been considered the most effective and in any case the safest institution for this, that is to say for having children.  
it is important that society protects homosexuals. 
we have all read a lot of material on this subject and we have all studied it well. 
i have often cited the profound writings of oscar wilde, in particular his book, de profundis, in which he talks about all that he has suffered as a result of his homosexuality.  
i am sure, honorable senators, that you will agree that a homosexual should never be made to suffer and that justice should be done. 
i would have preferred the minister to find a way to do this without having to base his legislation on sex or sexual activity. 
it's a revolutionary thing, never seen before.  
the honorable celine hervieux-payette:
honorable senators, i should like to ask the honorable senator a question.  
senator cools:
you're welcome.  
senator hervieux-payette:
in order to fully understand the subject of senator cools' concern, would she have preferred that these benefits be granted to people in a relationship of dependence, whether they are parents, a daughter and her father who would live together, or two friends, two cousins? , or two people who would support each other and live under the same roof? 
would she also have preferred that this initiative had in fact been of more general application, without having to enter the bedrooms of the nation, that is to say that it had been applicable to anyone in a relationship? dependence or interdependence?  
senator cools:
i thank the honorable senator for his insightful comments.  
honorable senators, a couple of things come to mind. 
it must be recognized that all senators would agree to grant benefits in all situations where members of a family depend financially on one another. 
i am sure that many senators are responsible for elderly or disabled parents. 
one of our colleagues told us that she had a disabled son. 
i am sure everyone would agree, as there are countless examples in the community of individuals who are burdened with the financial burden of having to provide for their dependents. 
i give you an example. 
in our dining room up there is a waitress who has raised her grandchildren. 
relations of this type are endless.  
honorable senators, i thought the minister would have opted for this solution because it is by far the easiest and the most interesting and that is why i wanted to put her words on the record. 
the minister told the standing senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs that she would do this and look at the full range of family dependency relationships. 
in witness whereof, i would like the minister to tell us why she backed down and what prompted her to do so? 
yes, i think there are a lot of people in canada who take on a heavy burden out of a sense of duty towards family members who need help.  
as to the second point raised by the honorable senator, which is a more difficult question, in 1968 homosexuality was decriminalized. 
it brings the state into the bedrooms of canadians because it does not say how the existence of a conjugal relationship will be determined.  
for example, if two people are married, the marriage certificate is proof that there is a commitment to mutual aid. 
you have to be mindful, even when the years of sexual activity are gone, about the commitment made and accepted voluntarily. 
this bill does not talk about that. 
someone else will have to determine whether or not a marital relationship exists. 
i would say to the honorable senator that i have no idea how this will be done. 
perhaps there will be a marital relations police; i do not know.  
in my opinion, this issue should be carefully considered by the committee. 
i see senator nolin looking me in the face. 
i am sure that senator nolin, as a lawyer who has argued in many important insurance and estate settlement cases, knows that death and marriage or divorce certificates are always requested.  
honorable senators, we are dealing with strange things here. 
among other things, i am disappointed that the minister simply did not read what i had to say on the matter. 
she could have found a way to achieve her political goal, which was the question senator kinsella asked, without using a gender argument. 
i don't know of any other piece of legislation that looks at sex or uses those kinds of terms. 
even all the jurisprudence surrounding marriage speaks in very different terms. 
so it's very disturbing.  
honorable senators, i do not want people to think that i am an old lady who is easily shocked. 
however, it seems to me that the best way to draft laws is, first of all, to do it in accordance with past laws, in as orderly as possible and with as little shock as possible to people. 
i understood that the law had always avoided lust.  
the honorable serge joyal:
honorable senators, it is with great pride that i take part in the debate on bill c-23, an act to modernize the benefits and obligations regime in the laws of canada.  
under the bill, same-sex couples will have the same benefits and obligations as heterosexual couples living in a common-law relationship. 
this measure stems from the judgment rendered by the supreme court of canada in the case of m. v. h., rendered on march 18, 1998. this judgment dealt essentially with the interpretation of subsection 15 (1) of the canadian charter of rights and freedoms, under the heading "equality rights".
the supreme court relied on this provision to say that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation was a direct infringement of equality rights guaranteed by the charter. 
bill c-23 is first and foremost a measure that deals with the right to equality and the freedom of choice that this right implies. 
to put it more simply, the supreme court ruled that discrimination based on sexual orientation is just as bad as discrimination based on race, ethnicity or color.  
in my opinion, this is one of the most serious grounds for discrimination that still exist in our so-called free and democratic society. 
let us recall facts that a certain number of us remember and which do not go back so far in the past.  
the policy of ethnic cleansing practiced by the third reich specifically targeted three groups: jews, gypsies and homosexuals. 
it is sometimes forgotten, but in the nazi extermination camps tens of thousands of homosexuals perished in the gas chambers. 
according to some holocaust historians, notably rudiger lautman, homosexual prisoners were, more than others, subjected to the worst brutalities of male intolerance. 
they had to wear the infamous pink triangle on their chest, and the number 175 on the back of their uniform, so as to always draw the attention of jailers and executioners to their identity.  
they were subjected to the most inhumane medical experiments, not to mention brain operations and the removal of genitals, under the pretext of ridding them of their degenerate condition. 
after the war, they were denied the status of victims of nazi persecution and any form of compensation. 
some even had to stay in prison to serve the sentences imposed by the nazi justice.  
honorable senators, the persecution of homosexuals did not end with the war. 
it was equally tragic in the dark years of mccarthyism, especially in the united states, and it had tragic consequences in canada, even at the highest levels of the canadian government.  
the suicide of diplomat herbert norman, an important colleague of lester b. pearson and canadian ambassador to egypt in 1957, is the most notorious example. 
at the time, his suicide was seen as the only way to escape public stigma and professional disqualification.  
how many senior officials, high ranking officers and public figures have seen their reputations destroyed by the following allegation: "yes, but he is a homosexual"? 
how many careers in the 1950s and 1960s ended or stagnated because being gay was synonymous with potential blackmail, weakness of character, and deviance incompatible with great responsibility?  
today, of course, being gay does not preclude being mayor of a large canadian city, judge, deputy, senator, minister or ambassador, but has discrimination really disappeared? 
social and political pressures are unfortunately still very strong.  
according to a study conducted by the department of social and professional studies at laval university, the results of which were published on april 27, 71 p. 100 of young gay men aged 15 to 24 have already thought about suicide and 36% 100 of these have already attempted suicide.  
the pressures of society and the stigma associated with homosexuality are stronger and more devastating than any other ground of distinction prohibited by the canadian charter of rights and freedoms.  
why do we have a charter, in fact? 
is it to reflect the opinion of the majority or rather the minorities who see suicide simply as the ultimate means of escaping stigma, the spirit of vengeance and humiliating ostracism?  
in recent years, the senate has taken steps to ensure that sexual orientation is no longer a prohibited ground of discrimination under the canadian human rights act. 
bill s-15, introduced in 1992 by senator kinsella, revived in 1996 as bill s-2 and again in 1997 as bill s-5 on social advancement programs. victims of discrimination, reflects the senate's interest in this serious situation. 
however, the true significance of the 1998 supreme court of canada judgment in m. v. h. remains to be discussed.  
honorable senators, our role, in my view, is to examine bill c-23 in the broad context of the supreme court's interpretation of protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation.  
what is it actually?  
the supreme court, by interpreting the inequality of access to benefits and obligations for same-sex couples as contrary to the right to equality protected by section 15.1 of the charter, formally recognized sexual orientation as a prohibited ground of discrimination. 
in other words, the court recognized the equal rights of sexualities. 
this is not without legal consequences for all other situations or conditions where exclusion based on sexual orientation arises.  
it is not unusual to recall that in 1981, when the joint committee, which i co-chaired at the time with the late honorable senator harry hays, was sitting on, the question asked members of the committee to add l sexual orientation on the list of prohibited grounds of discrimination in article 15, paragraph 1. 
i also supported this approach. 
at the time, the legal advisers to the minister of justice convinced us that it was better to rely on the introductory clause of section 15.1, the general scope of which would allow the courts to echo the the social evolution that canadian society would experience over the years.  
indeed, the enumeration of the grounds of discrimination mentioned in article 15.1 is not exhaustive. 
rather, it is illustrative of the type of discrimination that equality rights seek to eliminate. 
the inclusion of the word "in particular" confirms this interpretation and defines the extent of the scope of the assessment left to the courts in their assessment of the grounds of discrimination to be prohibited.  
what the supreme court has in fact recognized is the principle of equality between individuals, regardless of their sexuality. 
in other words, sexual orientation is no longer a ground for excluding the benefit of the law. 
it becomes forbidden to discriminate against a person or a couple and to exclude them from the advantages and obligations that are available to other people, solely on the basis of their sexual orientation.  
thus, the principle of equality of citizens before the law, to the exclusion of any consideration of their sexuality, becomes the standard to be respected in a free and democratic society such as canada.  
consequently, anything that, directly or indirectly, falls under the jurisdiction of the canadian state can no longer be prohibited to gays and lesbians on the basis of their sexual orientation.  
the rights and benefits, advantages and obligations sanctioned by the state must therefore be accessible to them under the same conditions, in the same way as they are to other individuals, citizens or couples regardless of their sexuality.  
equality, the founding principle of the rule of law, is the foundation of our society in which individuals are equal before the law. 
you cannot discriminate on the basis of color, race or ethnicity. 
since the judgment m. v. h., we can no longer discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation.  
this new standard in our law and in our institutions will have to lead to important, even fundamental, adjustments and corrective measures, the implications of which we do not yet understand.  
indeed, this question is probably the most delicate that canadian legislators have had to tackle since for a large number of people it is already the object of moral precepts commanded by particular religious allegiances.  
yet it is our responsibility as legislators to take up the challenge of assessing all situations where the state still makes a distinction in the allocation of its rights and benefits on the basis of the sexuality of individuals.  
now that the supreme court has ruled prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation, political will does not have to wait for consensus to restore individuals to their fundamental right to equality.  
the state has a fundamental responsibility to take all necessary measures to ensure that the provisions of the charter are fully respected and that all its laws and decisions faithfully reflect its application.  
of course, we cannot ignore the difficulties, even the passions that such an enterprise can raise, but we must remember the ethical neutrality of public legal order and our responsibility to protect minorities, especially those who are the most fragile, those that are easiest to exclude and marginalize and, why not, to ridicule.  
many experience a certain sense of personal moral discomfort in going beyond the teaching and prescriptions of their religious faith to accept the intellectual process of adjusting the laws and public institutions to full recognition of equal status in law. gays and lesbians and their equal access to the benefit of the law.  
but the state does not have to pronounce on the moral or religious prescriptions that the citizens decide to choose for themselves. 
it must allow all the morals to coexist without imposing the prescriptions of one or the other, especially if one of the morals is dominant and is imposed on the smallest number, who have opted for a different approach and who constitute the most oppressed minority under the weight of majority moral culture.  
this is the most difficult question we face as objective legislators. 
put aside our personal choices and rules to restore discriminated individuals to the full enjoyment of their attributes as free and equal citizens.  
this is why it seems to me that bill c-23, which rightly is essential to restore the full extent of their rights to these discriminated citizens, contains what the english term calls a "legal inconsistency", or another "legal contradiction", by establishing that same-sex couples living in a de facto union have the same benefits and obligations as opposite-sex couples living in a similar situation, but by reaffirming in article 1 of the bill l exclusion of these same couples from the benefits and obligations of marriage.  
logically, the legal recognition of the same-sex couple and their free access to the rights and obligations of the opposite-sex couple living in a de facto union goes beyond a simple claim of the subjective rights of a specific group. 
it is the logical continuation of a process of indifferentiation of the subject of law without which any egalitarian initiative remains below its fullness.  
in this context, marriage must be defined as an institution of a civil, contractual nature between two people of an egalitarian type, and which must be accessible without distinction of race, color, religion or sexual orientation.  
would we innovate in this regard when the canadian parliament has to address this issue? 
are we going against some kind of natural or anthropological law?  
honorable senators, other legal systems of countries or states comparable to canada have already legislated or developed a satisfactory legal system. 
to mention just one, the state of vermont, an american state close to us if there is one, has just adopted, on april 25, less than two weeks ago, a law which recognizes couples same-sex benefits and obligations of the civil union, the institutional equivalent of traditional marriage. 
the french parliament last year adopted the pacs, or pacte civil de solidarite et de concubinage, which also recognizes that same-sex couples benefit from the public sanction of the commitment made by two people of the same sex to each other. bind civilly to share the obligations of cohabitation and common life. 
denmark, the netherlands, norway and sweden have also developed a civil system which grants public recognition to the commitment made by same-sex couples to obligate each other. in the company of common life.  
french, danish, norwegian, swedish, dutch and american companies in vermont have resolved the legal challenge of recognizing full equality and full access to state recognition of the obligation freely assumed by two people, one vis-a-vis the other, to share the responsibilities that flow from a free union.  
any policy of recognition passes first through this stage of tolerance, with all that this term can hide of distant condescension. 
however, canadian opinion is probably beyond this embarrassed reluctance.  
bill c-23, in this regard, is an essential step towards the legal recognition of civil equality for same-sex couples who wish to commit themselves publicly to one another. 
it constitutes a decisive milestone which expresses the fundamental principles of the role of the state with regard to civil union, namely the recognition of equal access without distinction for the benefit of the law and its institutions.  
in this enterprise which consists in expressing in our laws the plurality and the complexity of the new families, we cannot escape the responsibility which consists in arranging the legal recognition by the state of the egalitarian association of two people in a contractual bond. recognized.  
this is the essential guarantee likely to put an end to public stigma and to ensure the hope that the same legal measure can guarantee in a society characterized by diversity, whether of a political or religious nature, ethnic or sexual.  
different sexualities are now part of social pluralism just like race, color or religious opinions. 
any infringement or discrimination based on sexual orientation must be combated with the same legislative rigor as racism, xenophobia or sexism.  
the attack on the pluralism of sexualities must henceforth be perceived as a danger for the democratic values   of our country. 
providing the conditions for hope in life is our ultimate responsibility for generations to come.  
these, honorable senators, are the personal reflections that should concern us during the debate on bill c-23.  
the honorable lowell murray:
honorable senators, if i understood correctly, senator joyal is at least implicitly opposed to the clause inserted by the minister of justice, late in the debate in the other place, aimed at reassuring people that the bill does not affect the definition of marriage in any way?  
senator joyal:
i thank the honorable senator for his question because it helps me clarify one aspect of my speech. 
i believe there is a legal contradiction. 
giving social, political and legal recognition to one type of union and imposing conditions on another fundamentally calls into question the principle of equality. 
either these unions are equal or they are not. 
if certain types of common-law relationship are recognized, why does the same principle not apply to other types?  
the ontario divisional court considered this issue in leyland and beaulne v. the attorney general of canada, in 1992.
three judges have ruled on the very question of the definition of marriage. 
two judges maintained the traditional definition, while justice greer took the opposite view. 
i believe that if the supreme court of canada had to rule today in the m v. h, justice greer's opinion would prevail.
this is my interpretation of the judgment rendered in the m v. h.  
thus, the minister added to article 1.1 of the bill the interpretation of marriage according to customary law in canada, instead of defining it within the framework of an act of the parliament of canada. 
there is no definition of marriage in canadian law. 
the only piece of legislation we have regarding marriage is the one that prohibits marriage for certain reasons, but there is no definition of marriage. 
the definition of marriage is essentially a definition of customary law. 
in clause 1.1 of the bill, we introduce, in a piece of legislation, the definition of marriage as interpreted by customary law. 
however, i believe that since the judgment of the supreme court of canada in m   v. v, this definition is no longer exact.  
let me make it clear that i will not be voting against the bill. 
i intend to support it as is, because it represents a very important measure aimed at clearly establishing the principle of equality as interpreted by the supreme court of section 15.1 of our charter. 
the bill, however, leaves the question of the civil definition of marriage unresolved. 
i emphasize the phrase "civil definition of marriage" as opposed to "religious definition of marriage". 
there is, in my opinion, a fundamental distinction. 
when the state defines marriage in the year 2000, it is to provide access on an equal basis to the benefits of the law and the benefits of public institutions.  
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, the intervention and the question have unfortunately exceeded the 15 minutes allowed. 
do you wish to grant leave to continue?  
voices:
okay.  
senator murray:
would the honorable senator tell us if he thinks that the article to which i have just referred, confirming, if at all, a certain definition of marriage, will end up being examined by the courts?  
senator joyal:
honorable senators, i do not want to predict what will happen in canadian courts, but now that the m v. h, somebody somewhere is going to take this matter back to court.
anyway, as i said in my response to senator murray, i think we can vote on the bill in its present form although some of us probably share the view that j expressed today that the bill, by redefining marriage according to the common law, answers the question of how far one can go in interpreting equality. 
where does equality end?  
as i said, the m v. it is based primarily on section 15.1 of the charter.
if we interpret a provision of the charter in a way that distinguishes a situation, we thereby exclude racial discrimination while accepting it in certain situations. 
as for the definition of marriage, in the light of the interpretation of other articles of the charter and according to the principles of equality and non-discrimination, the situation is such today that we are far from 'have answered the question. 
given the complexity of the matter, and i am the first to admit it, the supreme court will certainly be seized again.  
the honorable landon pearson:
senator joyal will no doubt allow me to make a small correction, for posterity. 
i have great respect for senator joyal, and i am sure he would not like the record to contain inaccuracies. 
however, i fear he chose a bad example. 
indeed, the suicide of herbert norman had nothing to do with this kind of discrimination. 
it was caused by attacks by the united states house of representatives committee on anti-american activities. 
herbert norman was driven to suicide by the fact that he was suspected of being a communist sympathizer rather than anything else in his past, as his widow will attest.  
senator joyal:
honorable senators, i appreciate the clarification of the honorable senator pearson. 
they were advised that a security check had made it possible to draw conclusions which, if made public, meant shame, so that they had the opportunity to resign, be promoted or demoted, or else be demoted. '' go and practice their profession elsewhere. 
i am sure senator pearson is aware of instances where this has happened. 
as far as herbert norman is concerned, i have read the memoirs of the late right honorable lester b. pearson and the recently published book by john english on the pearson years. 
i would say that a doubt remains. 
herbert norman's reputation was attacked, and when he ended his life evil tongues tried to find another cause. 
allusions have been made about it.  
senator pearson:
honorable senators, i knew herbert norman. 
his wife is a friend. 
i believe the questionable aspects of his background that the security check uncovered were of a different order and that his suicide was a terrible tragedy for all of us.  
the honorable peter a. stollery:
honorable senators, i have no complaints about senator joyal's speech and i also want to support what senator pearson said. 
i lived in africa two years after mr. norman passed away, and some of my friends know the family of the former ambassador very well. 
following the suicide he committed by throwing himself down from the roof of the embassy in cairo in 1957, i made him the subject of the first work i wrote on africa. 
i think it would be unfortunate to leave what i think is a bad impression about the reasons for his death. 
that's what we said at the time, and i never heard anything that could change that opinion.  
senator cools:
honorable senators, i have a quick question. 
if i may, while i am on my feet, i would point out that when i answered senator hervieux-payette's questions, i believe i said that mr. trudeau was minister of justice. 
the minister of justice in the other place has said many times that bill c-23 will neither diminish nor undermine marriage. 
she also reiterated that the government of canada is committed to ensuring the sustenance of the marriage. 
i am not sure i denote a difference of opinion, but we will shed light on this in committee.  
if i understood correctly, senator joyal said, and i will be corrected if i am wrong, that marriage should simply be a civil union, a civil contract.  
senator joyal:
honorable senators, i said that marriage is a contractual bond, publicly recognized by the state, between two people charged with facing and sharing, on an equal footing, the obligations of life. 
this is the civil definition i give to marriage. 
of course, it has nothing to do with what religious definition a church or moral code might give it. 
however, as far as the public sanction of marriage is concerned, that is the definition he should have, in my opinion.  
the last thing i want to do is damage their reputation. 
i want to reassure senator pearson and senator stollery that my goal is quite the opposite.  
senator cools:
senator joyal:
honorable senators, that is why divorce is based on mutual consent. 
today is the condition of divorce. 
you can get divorced for all kinds of reasons, but basically divorce today is by mutual consent.  
if two people decide to end their marriage, they go to court and fill out a document. 
they should try to reconcile for a certain period of time, and after that period has expired, if no improvement has occurred, the union is over.  
the context is very different from what it was 30 years ago, especially in the province of quebec, when marriage was indissoluble. 
this is no longer the case. 
you can now end a marriage by mutual consent. 
this clearly shows that marriage is a contract.  
senator cools:
his honor the speaker:
is it the pleasure of honorable senators to adopt the motion?  
voices:
okay.  
a voice:
on dissent.  
(motion agreed to and bill read a second time on division)  
referral to committee 
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, when will we read this bill a third time?  
(on motion of senator pepin, the bill was referred to the standing senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs.)  
canada elections act bill 
third reading-motion in amendment-vote deferred 
the agenda calls for: 
resuming debate on the motion of the honorable senator hays, seconded by the honorable senator moore, for the third reading of bill c-2, an act respecting the election of members to the house of commons, to amend certain acts and repealing certain other laws.  
"(2) $ 4,000 to promote the election of one or".  
the honorable noel a. kinsella (deputy leader of the opposition):
honorable senators, senator atkins adjourned this item after debate began on senator oliver's motion in amendment. 
we are confident that this amendment would be supported by all honorable senators.  
his honor the speaker:
if no one else wishes to speak, is it your pleasure, honorable senators, to adopt the motion in amendment?  
voices:
okay.  
voices:
no.  
his honor the speaker:
all senators in favor of the motion in amendment will please say yes.  
voices:
yes.  
his honor the speaker:
all senators who are against the motion in amendment will please say no. 
voices:
no.  
his honor the speaker:
in my opinion, the nays have it.  
and two honorable senators having risen: 
his honor the speaker:
call in the senators.  
the honorable mable m. deware:
honorable senators, i have spoken with the government whip, and he has agreed that the vote be deferred until tomorrow at 3:30 pm, pursuant to rule 65 (3).  
the honorable dan hays (deputy leader of the government):
that is correct, honorable senators.  
his honor the speaker:
do you agree, honorable senators, that the bells ring at 3:15 pm, with the deferred vote being held at 3:30 pm? 
voices:
okay.  
bill on payments in lieu of taxes 
third reading 
he said: honorable senators, i rise to speak on the occasion of the third and final reading of bill c-10, an act respecting payments in lieu of taxes to municipalities.  
first, i would like to thank honorable senators for supporting this measure at second reading. 
it is clear that we all recognize the benefits of the municipal grants program and its importance to all municipalities across the country. 
many of us come from communities that took advantage of the old federal practice of paying in lieu of taxes on real property. 
one can imagine what would happen if this practice ended because of the government's constitutional exemption from paying property taxes. 
the impact of such a cessation on the municipalities would be significant, even enormous in some cases. 
there is no doubt that municipal subsidies would be cut, services would be cut and jobs would be lost.  
honorable senators, the purpose of this bill is to strengthen the current payments system, not to reduce its costs. 
bill c-10 maintains the principles of fairness and equity that have guided the program since its inception and improves the predictability of payments, which will provide stability to municipalities in their budget process.  
in 1995, the government appointed a joint technical committee to study various options for modernizing the municipal subsidy program. 
the committee was made up of representatives of the federation of canadian municipalities, the treasury board secretariat and public works and government services canada. 
it produced two reports, a first in 1995 and a second in 1997.  
i think we have to recognize the important role that the joint technical committee has played in reviewing and reforming the program. 
we must also pay tribute to the current minister of public works and government services. 
after carefully reviewing the work that has been done over the past few years, the minister made a personal commitment 18 months ago to modernize the program in the light of national consultations with a wide range of stakeholders. 
working in collaboration with the federation of canadian municipalities, the minister undertook consultations which took him to 11 cities during the summer of 1998 and which allowed him to learn firsthand how the program could be improved. .  
since we are talking about this tour, honorable senators, it is also important to recognize the excellent work of municipal officials, evaluation specialists and other interested parties who took the time to engage in a constructive and positive dialogue with the minister. 
these meetings established a climate of respect and a new understanding between the two orders of government and they undoubtedly strengthened the unity of our country at an important time in our history.  
honorable senators, a number of organizations played a role in this regard and supported the bill, including the federation of canadian municipalities and the appraisal institute of canada. 
the takeaway from all of this is that this is solid legislation that will bring about important and much needed changes to a program that has served our country well for 50 years. years. 
bill c-10 sends a clear message that the federal government respects the standards set for other landowners.  
it establishes a framework that will strike a balance between the interests of all canadian taxpayers and the needs of local communities, and it ensures that the federal presence remains a positive factor in communities from coast to coast to coast. another in the new millennium.  
that is why i ask you, honorable senators, to support bill c-10 so that it can be proclaimed and implemented as quickly as possible.  
his honor the speaker:
if no other senator wishes to speak, i will call the question.  
voices:
okay.  
(motion agreed to and bill read a third time and passed)  
the special senate committee on bill c-20 
motion for constitution-president's ruling-adjournment of debate 
the agenda calls for: 
motion by the honorable senator hays, seconded by the honorable senator robichaud, pc (l'acadie-acadia): 
that a special senate committee be established to study, after second reading, bill c-20, an act to give effect to the requirement for clarity set out by the supreme court of canada in its opinion on the reference on the secession of quebec; 
that, notwithstanding standing order 85 (1) (b), the committee be composed of fifteen members, including: 
senator joan fraser 
senator celine hervieux-payette, pc 
senator colin kenny 
senator george furey 
senator richard kroft 
senator thelma chalifoux 
senator lorna milne 
senator aurelien gill; 
that the quorum be made up of four members; 
that the committee have the power to summon persons and produce documents, to hear witnesses, and to have documents and testimony printed on a daily basis, as directed by the committee; and
that the committee be empowered to allow the reporting of its public proceedings by electronic news media, with as little interference as possible in its proceedings; and
that the committee be authorized to retain the services of professionals and support staff and others as it deems necessary .- ( 
decision of the president).  
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, i am now ready to render my ruling on the matter raised in this matter.  
last thursday, may 4, 2000, senator lynch-staunton, leader of the opposition, rose on a point of order after senator hays moved a motion to establish a special committee to study bill c-20, relating to the requirement for clarity in the referendum file. 
the notice of motion had been properly prepared earlier in the week, on tuesday. 
in support of his thesis, he cited passages on the prohibition of anticipation from several authoritative parliamentary procedure books, including erskine may, beauchesne and the procedure and practice of the house of commons, which were recently published.  
during the exchange on the point of order, senator kinsella spoke in support of the leader of the opposition. 
he said he found it unthinkable to set up a special committee to examine a matter which, under the rules of the senate, should be referred to the standing committee, whose mandate, he said, covered matters such as those referred to in the senate. bill c-20. senator cools echoed the same point and further claimed that the wording of the motion was flawed.
senator murray, for his part, said that he did not understand how senator hays' motion could be admissible, especially in view of the ruling of tuesday, may 2, 2000 concerning motions of instructions to committees.  
as i began my study of the objection, i realized that some of the arguments presented against the motion seem to overlap. 
i will nevertheless treat them in isolation.  
it is true that the motion presupposes a favorable vote on second reading of bill c-20, but it does not have the effect of determining that result in advance. 
from a procedural standpoint, the two motions are separate issues. 
senator lynch-staunton then pointed out that committees are bound and limited by their order of reference. 
there is a weakness in this reasoning, however, which senator murray also pointed out in his intervention, since he felt that a motion to establish a special committee and a motion of instructions to a committee are similar, at least in the extent to which neither can be introduced before second reading of the bill to which they relate.  
as everyone who spoke to this point last thursday admitted, a motion to establish a committee is debatable. 
in fact, that is what follows from standing order 62 (1) (h), according to which a motion to establish a standing or special committee may be considered. 
senator hays further noted that under rule 93, the senate "may, if it sees fit, appoint special committees, whose terms of reference, delimits the powers and specifies the tasks". .  
it follows that the only way to send a bill to a special or legislative committee, which our rules also allow, is to create that committee by means of a separate debatable motion. 
several precedents seem to confirm my understanding of this procedure.  
in the past twelve years, the senate has decided on three occasions to create a special committee to study a bill. 
two of these cases predate the changes made to the regulations in 1991. 
the first occurred in july 1988, and the bill under consideration was bill c-72, relating to official languages. 
the second dates back to the following year, in november 1989, and concerned bill c-21 on unemployment insurance. 
in both cases, the first motion was adopted after second reading, but the second motion was adopted before second reading. 
the third and most recent precedent occurred in 1995, during the study of bill c-110, relating to constitutional amendments. 
in each of the three cases, notice of the motion was given prior to the adoption of the motion for second reading of the bill. 
in fact, only the 1995 precedent was debated, although all the motions could have been.  
although the practices of the other place are not identical to ours, it is also impossible here, as in the senate, to debate the question of the committee to which the bill will be referred after the end of the debate at second reading. 
consequently, the motion to create the special joint committee had to be adopted before the question on second reading was put to a vote.  
looking at it a little differently than the leader of the opposition, senator kinsella argued that the rules of the senate set out the terms of reference for each of our standing committees, including legal and constitutional affairs. 
he argued that bill c-20 is clearly within the mandate of this committee and therefore it should be referred to it, not to a special committee. 
whatever its merits, this view ignores another provision of the standing orders, namely subsection 86 (2), which reads as follows: 
"all bills, messages, petitions, interpellations, documents or other matters may be referred, by decision of the senate, to any committee."  
this provision allows the senate, if it sees fit, to ignore the mandate of standing committees. 
it therefore appears that there is nothing in the standing orders that precludes a motion to establish a special committee.  
finally, there is senator lynch-staunton's third argument, which overlaps somewhat with his argument on anticipation. 
as was explained last thursday, the rule against anticipating is not expressly stated in the rules of the senate or in the rules of the other place, although it is an essential principle of our practice. 
beauchesne points out, in comments 512 (1) and (2) of its parliamentary case law, on page 161 of the sixth edition, that the prohibition to anticipate derives from the same principle as the prohibition on raising twice "the same question >>during a session. 
the rule prohibiting anticipation provides: 
[...] that an issue cannot be addressed in advance if the planned approach is more appropriate than the proposed new approach.  
in descending order of priority, a bill takes precedence over a motion, and a motion takes precedence over amendments. 
senator lynch-staunton argued that since the bill takes precedence over the motion to create the special committee, it must take precedence over it.  
i would be prepared to accept this argument if it could be proven to me that the two issues are the same or even similar in substance, but this is not the case. 
the motion for second reading of bill c-20 involves a decision on the principle of the measure and whether the bill warrants further consideration by the senate.  
the motion to establish a special committee to consider bill c-20 does not directly address the principle or content of the bill, but rather seeks to provide for an alternative and the possibility of referring the bill. bill to another type of committee. 
these two motions are not equivalent in substance, and the rule against anticipation does not apply to their consideration.  
for all of these reasons, i find that senator hays' motion is in order and debatable.  
the honorable dan hays (deputy leader of the government):
honorable senators, i am glad that we have had the opportunity to clarify the issue raised by senator lynch-staunton. 
i must now speak to the motion, which i propose to do at this time.  
the honorable noel a. kinsella (deputy leader of the opposition):
you had better move the motion first.  
senator hays:
honorable senators, i am moving the motion again even though i had already moved it on may 4, which triggered a point of order from senator lynch-staunton.  
honorable senators, i move: 
that a special senate committee be established to study, after second reading, bill c-20, an act to give effect to the requirement for clarity set out by the supreme court of canada in its opinion on the reference on the secession of quebec; 
that, notwithstanding standing order 85 (1) (b), the committee be composed of fifteen members, including: 
senator joan fraser 
senator celine hervieux-payette, pc 
senator colin kenny 
senator marie p. poulin (charette) 
senator george furey 
senator richard kroft 
senator thelma chalifoux 
senator lorna milne 
senator aurelien gill; 
that the quorum be made up of four members; 
that the committee have the power to summon persons and produce documents, to hear witnesses, and to have documents and testimony printed on a daily basis, as directed by the committee; 
that the committee be empowered to allow the reporting of its public proceedings by electronic news media, with as little interference as possible in its proceedings; and
that the committee be authorized to retain the services of professionals and support staff and others that it deems necessary.  
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, is it the pleasure of honorable senators to adopt the motion?  
voices:
okay.  
senator kinsella:
could we have an explanation of this motion, honorable senators?  
senator hays:
honorable senators, this motion has been moved to allow a special committee to study bill c-20, should the senate decide to do second reading. 
in this case, we on this side of the house believe that the best course of action is to create a special committee. 
if i say this, it is for several reasons. 
one of those reasons is that the standing senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs is very busy. 
it is currently seized of several legislative measures. 
at this point in the parliamentary calendar, as we approach the summer recess, we expect it to have before it a number of important bills from the other place. 
it must also consider several private, public and senate bills. 
in short, he is very busy.  
it remains to be seen whether there is a good reason for creating a special committee that would have more flexibility to do the job. 
we on this side of the house say yes and that the best way to solve the problem is to create the special committee proposed in the motion.  
the other important thing is that the committee can be larger than our standing committee, which has only 12 members. 
in my motion, honorable senators, i propose the creation of a committee of 15 members, which would give us a little more flexibility, since in accordance with the practice in the case of a committee of 15 persons, we could recruit two senators from more from the government side and one more senator from the opposition side.  
another reason why we on this side believe that a special committee is an appropriate way to proceed is that such a committee would provide some flexibility given that it would only have to deal with a single bill. 
it could organize its sitting days much more easily than a standing committee, given that a standing committee like the standing senate committee on legal and constitutional affairs already has a very heavy agenda.  
it is an important bill that we are considering sending to this committee, if the senate will pass it at second reading. 
it will take a lot of time and attention. 
we think a special committee is a great way to give it the time and attention it needs. 
the committee may sit on monday and friday when some of our committees are sitting. 
assuming this bill receives second reading, the committee could even meet for weeks when the senate is not normally expected to sit. 
this decision will be up to committee members.  
as honorable senators will note from my motion, the committee would have the right to televise its proceedings. 
in fact, it is something that i think we on the government side will insist on, and i am sure the same will be true of opposition senators who might sit on this committee.  
it is about the composition of the committee. 
the motion i put forward talks about a 15-person committee, but does not specify who would sit on behalf of the opposition. 
this issue could be resolved in a number of ways. 
however, i believe our practice in the circumstances is for the selection committee to meet. 
it is chaired by the government whip, senator mercier. 
he would determine the other members. 
in fact, it would probably confirm the composition that i specified in the motion before the senate. 
this committee would then report to the senate, which hopefully would approve this report. 
then we would have a committee to send bill c-20, this important bill that took up so much of our time at second reading.  
honorable senators, these are my arguments and my explanation of the motion to establish a special committee to study bill c-20. 
(on motion of senator cools, debate adjourned.)  
bill on the protection of young people against tobacco 
second reading 
he said: honorable senators, i sometimes consider myself very lucky to belong to this institution, and i do today. 
life has given us the chance to help young canadians struggling with a problem that affects all of canadian society, and if i can persuade the house of the benefits of this bill, we will also have the chance to profoundly change the lives of children for years to come.  
first, i would like to describe the problem this bill addresses. 
in 1997, when i looked at tobacco statistics for the first time, 40,000 people died each year from a disease related to tobacco use. 
in the last year alone, statistics collected by health canada show that 45,000 deaths are attributable to tobacco each year, which is an increase of 5,000 deaths. 
these figures could therefore rise well beyond 45,000.  
second, young people start smoking much earlier than before. 
when i first became interested in the matter, 80% of the 100 of canadian smokers started smoking before the age of 18.
you never hear a 40-year-old say, "i think i'm going to try a cigarette now." 
we are talking about children who are starting to light earlier and earlier. 
then finally, there is the question of costs. 
health canada points out that we directly spend $ 3 billion per year on tobacco-related diseases and indirectly $ 7 billion. 
that is ten billion dollars that are spent each year on tobacco-related diseases.  
young people are the important target group on which we must focus. 
bill s-20 is about young people. 
it focuses on young people and aims to serve them. 
only by focusing on young people will we be able to break the cycle of fraud that tobacco companies must resort to in order to maintain their markets and their profits. 
for decades, tobacco companies have campaigned aggressively to attract customers of all age groups. 
arguments like "freedom of choice" and "lifestyle" are used. 
i am in favor of freedom of choice. 
in my opinion, this argument applies to any adult, but it does not apply when it comes to 10, 11 and 12 year olds.  
this document concerns the protection of our children. 
it is not a question of freedom of choice. 
all senators in this chamber can decide whether or not to smoke, and i would not intervene with any of them to try to steer their decision one way or the other. 
however, i react very differently when children are involved. 
again, this is the purpose of bill s-20. 
in canada, as i said, 45,000 people die each year from tobacco-related illnesses; this product is the leading cause of preventable death in canada.
to put this phenomenon in context, i would point out that the automobile, including drunk driving, is the second leading cause of preventable death, and that it kills approximately 4,000 per year. 
therefore, tobacco is the deadliest thing we have to deal with with the death toll being ten times higher than from any other cause.  
honorable senators, i do not want to mislead you into thinking that tobacco control in canada has been a disaster. 
in fact, i believe the government has done a lot of good things. 
i think the government should take credit for it and i'm prepared to give it to them. 
first, we have excellent tobacco legislation. 
she is very useful and productive. 
second, i believe that bill c-42 is effective in that it will finally end the promotion of cigarettes. 
in three years, it will be done. 
in my opinion, we also have a good proposal for warning labels to appear on cigarette packages, so i am prepared to recognize that the government has made significant efforts in a variety of areas. 
however, there is still a significant funding gap. 
currently, the federal government allocates $ 20 million to tobacco control, split evenly between law enforcement and education. 
this represents 66c. per inhabitant.
how to find a solution? 
before embarking on my travels this yesterday, i called a sacramento doctor by the name of deleep bal. 
dr. bal heads the state of california tobacco control program. 
california is the pioneer in the fight against smoking.  
doctor bal has a good sense of humor. 
he replied that five years ago per capita consumption in california was 120 packs per year and this year per capita consumption in california was 60 packs. 
its budget has been cut in half.  
its program is very similar to that discussed in the measure under consideration. 
its funding is based on the quantity of cigarettes sold. 
as he managed to reduce the volume of cigarette sales, his budget was reduced accordingly.  
california is the clear leader in the united states, but massachusetts is not far behind. 
massachusetts imposed an additional tax of 25 cents on each pack of cigarettes. 
in the first three years of the program, cigarette consumption decreased by 17%. 100 statewide.  
there is no reason we cannot do it. 
there is nothing magical there. 
these states have a comprehensive program. 
they have focused on this plan and are devoting serious amounts to it so that the program becomes effective because they attach importance to their children. 
they want to reduce smoking, they want to stop smoking, and they want to do it now.  
his honor the speaker:
honorable senators, i am sorry to interrupt senator kenny, but it is now six o'clock. 
what does the senate want to do?  
the honorable dan hays (deputy leader of the government):
honorable senators, i suggest that we ignore the clock. 
having said that, looking at the list of speakers, i calculate that we still have about 60 to 80 minutes of debate.  
his honor the speaker:
do you wish, honorable senators, to ignore the clock?  
voices:
okay.  
senator kenny:
thank you, honorable senators. 
i appreciate your allowing me to continue my intervention.  
my point is very simple. 
if the proportion of young smokers is 11%. 100 in california, we can do the same in canada.
i do not see why it would not be possible, if we decide to put this program in place. 
we have a model. 
any of the doctors here will tell you that the epidemiological centers in atlanta have a reputation for public health. 
they gave us the way forward, so that we could target the same goals.  
honorable senators, i said earlier that our tobacco control programs are funded today at 66 cents per person. 
the atlanta center for disease control invites us to spend 9 to 24 canadian dollars per person on these programs and it is not the only one. 
i have a list of per capita expenditures, in canadian dollars, for a few states. 
we are not alone. 
we are not inventing the wheel. 
it is not magic. 
there are other administrations which devote significant sums to this problem and which obtain convincing results.  
honorable senators, the best model to follow, that of the center for disease control in the united states, is based on leading comprehensive action on tobacco control. 
the principle is found in the bill. 
it covers community programs, school programs, province-wide programs, national programs, media information campaigns, counter-advertising programs, telephone support for dropouts, assessment. and advice to directors. 
if we were to follow this model, we would not be spending $ 3 million on the tobacco control program, but $ 90 million. 
if our information campaigns are ineffective, it is first and foremost for the good reason that we use american ads, not ads created right here in canada. 
anyone who understands canada at all knows that information campaigns should be targeted by region. 
we cannot take an advertisement produced for toronto, have it translated into french for montreal and think that it will achieve the intended objective. 
we all know it doesn't work.  
senator prud'homme:
at least the liberal organizers are aware of it. 
you are right.  
senator kenny:
thank you, senator prud'homme. 
liberal organizers are not the only ones to be aware of this. 
people who want to connect with canadians know this. 
we cannot borrow from the americans, think that a version of their advertising can be translated into french and believe that it can succeed. 
we need to create our own campaigns.  
more specifically, we have to spend reasonable amounts. 
if we're only spending $ 3 million on a goal when the model recommends $ 90 million, it's time to analyze why we're not getting the results we want.  
what are the important principles of the bill? 
this puts us in the lower quartile of the cdc recommended scale. 
it's not a lot of money when you think about it. 
it's $ 6 more than the mississippi. 
we can do better than the mississippi. 
second, the bill calls for the creation of a canadian model for the development of a comprehensive tobacco control program similar to that of the center for disease control in atlanta.  
the bill would impose a levy of $ 0.0075 per cigarette, which is 19 cents per pack or $ 1.50 per carton. 
this would collect $ 360 million per year, or $ 12 per person. 
again, this is in the lower quartile according to cdc recommendations.  
the bill provides for a levy for industry purposes, which would ensure stable funding. 
the health sector receives irregular funding, which varies from year to year. 
he cannot plan from year to year. 
he constantly wonders whether he will be able to keep program a or b in place, only because he has to wait for each budget before knowing whether he will get funds. 
it messes up all his planning.  
the bill also provides for a transparent decision-making process. 
each decision would be made public. 
we would all know who received the funds and when they were paid. 
i challenge anyone in this room to tell me what is happening on a day-to-day basis not only in this government, not only in the department of health, but also in any government. 
it's very difficult. 
this is true for parliamentarians and even more so for the public.  
all its meetings would be made public like its decisions. 
the costs would be capped at 5%. because we don't want the bureaucracy to grow.  
what matters more is that 10% 100 will be reserved for the evaluation of all projects.
everyone in the health sector will tell you that the main problem is precisely that we do not devote sufficient funds to the evaluation of projects. 
by carrying out an evaluation, we avoid repeating the same mistakes year after year.  
in california, there is an evaluator who steps in from the start, and an evaluation plan is submitted. 
we expect 10%. 100 of the global grant for this purpose.
the evaluation is accompanied by benchmarks throughout the process, benchmarks that help determine whether the program is meeting its objectives. 
the bill before us proposes the same type of assessment and disclosure; that way we will know whether a program is working or not.
honorable senators, the second aspect i want to address is the importance of funding. 
we talked about the number of deaths going from 40,000 to 45,000. 
we talked about the number of young people starting to smoke earlier and earlier and the fact that in the case of 80% of the 100 of smokers, the age at which they started to smoke increased from 18 to 16 years.
we talked about the $ 9 to $ 24 that the center for disease control spends in atlanta. 
that is why it is important that we provide adequate funding to implement this bill.  
we can consult the summary that was made. 
the current approach is left to chance and ineffective. 
there are no principles for establishing adequate funding. 
there needs to be a comprehensive national approach.  
why do we need all of this? 
because, in california, this formula has been proven. 
she is popular. 
in the long term, it saves money. 
it saves taxpayers' money because part of the money used to treat the sick has been used to prevent people from falling ill. 
why are we spending $ 3 billion on care and $ 20 million on prevention when, if we did a little more prevention, we would spare people all the pain and all these misfortunes that they have to go through? 
it's simple logic.  
the minister summons his deputy minister. 
the minister said to the deputy, "i'll help you look good if you reciprocate." 
we all know that successful departments need this twinning. 
politics and administration must go hand in hand to be successful.  
we also know that it is in the nature of departments to highlight the good programs and hold back the less good. 
it is not unique to the liberals or the conservatives. 
this is true of governments everywhere. 
this is how governments work.  
the problem with tobacco control is that we are talking about health science here. 
we are talking about something that is not certain. 
no one really knows how teenage brains work. 
i would venture to say that honorable senators who are parents of teenagers still have a hard time getting them to pick up their clothes. 
that's my case. 
and i can assure you that teenagers give me other problems.  
the very nature of tobacco control puts programs at risk of failure. 
this goes hand in hand with the theoretical and scientific approach. 
you have to accept it. 
if you go to california, you will be shown an arm-length chess list to be proud of. 
you will be shown the list. 
our list will be somewhat different, as we are somewhat different and we have different issues to resolve. 
we have to solve them our way, but we shouldn't be afraid of failing. 
one of the difficulties is that there can be no failure if it is a department that does it. 
given his position, any minister must defend everything that is done in his department and say that he has done what was necessary. 
the very nature of the opposition is to tell the government that it has done its job poorly and to explain why. 
suddenly, tobacco control becomes a political issue.  
it does not mean anything. 
research must be taken away from the political process - not too much, but enough. 
we saw the government do it recently with the canadian institutes of health research, the cihr. 
it does not mean anything.  
the existence of a foundation that is independent from government is fundamental if research is to promote health rather than policy. 
it also requires an assessment so that the people know what went wrong. 
everything will be public. 
there are no problems.  
i have to say that in every state where there has been a comprehensive tobacco control program, there has been blatant political interference. 
in california, the issue was addressed in proposition 99. 
the state legislature began to embezzle funds in california, and the american cancer society had to sue the state, recover the funds and spend them again on the children.  
in massachusetts, the governor has begun censoring advertisements. 
god knows why. 
he is certainly not an expert on the matter. 
in fact, the ad he censored was the one that i believe was called the seven dwarfs. 
the ceos of the big tobacco companies all stood up and said, "i swear to tell the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth," then they sat down and said, one after another, that tobacco was not addictive. 
it was all publicity, yet it was withdrawn by the governor. 
go figure it out. 
it is not part of the health process.  
that healthcare professionals design advertisements that will reach children, that are aimed at children and that will get results with children. 
this is the second reason why it is important that we have this bill.  
i would like to conclude by saying that we have a terrible health problem, but we have pretty good laws and we have a solution. 
when honorable senators consider this bill, i would like them to remember that 11% of the 100 of young people smoke in california.
we have a significant gap that needs to be filled in canada, and that is the funding gap. 
this bill will provide that funding. 
it meets this need without taking a penny of taxpayer money, not a penny. 
it is not a tax measure.  
finally, honorable senators, i believe that after all these years we have come to the conclusion that it is the right thing to do and that it is the right time to do it.  
the honorable pierre claude nolin:
honorable senators, this is not the first time that i have supported senator kenny in his approach to tobacco products and to canadian youth. 
i do not intend to repeat all the words skillfully and elegantly raised by senator kenny.  
honorable senators who participated in and followed the debates during the first session of the 36th parliament will recall bill s-13, passed unanimously by this chamber. 
i certainly hope that bill s-20 will receive the same approval after careful study in committee, it goes without saying.  
bill s-13 did not receive the approval of the house of commons. 
by correcting the latter, we are ensuring that bill s-20 will not suffer the same fate.  
in committee, we will have plenty of time to explain to members why bill s-20 is appropriate. 
three reasons make bill s-20 acceptable. 
according to the ruling of the speaker of the house in the other place, it is because of the preamble. 
there are legal opinions to this effect. 
this preamble clearly explains why the tobacco industry, which at this time suffers from popular stigma, has no credibility to defend, promote or thwart the evolution of smoking among young people when they would like to. 
several industry witnesses have testified about this, but they had no credibility to do so. 
hence the importance of allowing funds to be available for such an objective to be achieved.  
bill s-20 improves upon bill s-13. 
it should get the approval of the other place because clause 3 of the bill establishes that there must be a distinction between the reason for establishing the foundation - the youth education program - and the bill. 
it may sound similar, but they are two completely different things. 
they may not have been properly understood by the speaker in the other place.  
clause 35 of bill s-20 establishes the benefits for the industry. 
there are three reasons which, according to the learned prosecutor who examined the file, lead us to conclude that bill s-20 should not receive the same fate as bill s-13. 
if it obtains the approval of this house, when it is under consideration in the other place, we have every reason to believe that this bill will be adopted there.  
honorable senators, it is important that we send this bill to committee as quickly as possible so that we can fully examine it, as we did the last time during our study of bill s- 13.  
for honorable senators who had followed the debate, this will be a bit of a repetition. 
it is important to repeat the exercise seriously, as we are able to do.  
the honorable marcel prud'homme:
honorable senators, i agree with senator nolin's comments. 
what i wanted to say today, i will say in committee, as he has just suggested to us.  
the honorable sharon carstairs (the hon. the acting speaker):
is it the pleasure of honorable senators to adopt the motion?  
voices:
okay.  
(motion carried and bill read a second time.)  
referral to committee 
his honor the acting speaker:
honorable senators, when will we read this bill a third time?  
(on motion of senator kenny, the bill was referred to the standing senate committee on energy, the environment and natural resources.  
sir john a. macdonald day bill 
second reading-debate continued 
the agenda calls for: 
resuming debate on the motion of the honorable senator grimard, seconded by the honorable senator atkins, for the second reading of bill s-16, an act respecting sir john a. macdonald day .- ( 
honorable senator grafstein). 
the honorable noel a. kinsella (deputy leader of the opposition):
honorable senators, bill s-16, introduced by my colleague senator grimard, has attracted the attention of a number of senators. 
i understand that senator grafstein and senator grimard are asking whether or not they will be able to integrate this bill into another.  
until then we have bill s-16, which is valid in itself, and i think it can be supported. 
however, as this item has been on the order paper for 15 days and still has not been debated, i look forward to progress being made and these questions being approved or defeated, and not simply left on the order paper without being examined.  
as i understand it, extensive consultations have taken place on the principle of this bill, and i look forward to hearing senator grafstein speak to the bill again.  
(on motion of senator hays, for senator grafstein, debate adjourned.)  
bill to change the names of certain electoral districts 
second reading - adjournment of debate 
he said: honorable senators, this bill is similar to others that the other place sends to us from time to time and which relate to changing the name of electoral districts. 
demographics are usually the reason.  
some people have concerns about this bill. 
however, the committee is better able than the senate to examine these concerns.  
i move that we adopt this bill at second reading and send it to committee.  
the honorable marcel prud'homme:
honorable senators, it is true that this debate has already taken place and that objections have been raised. 
we will have to put our cards on the table. 
one member, for example, represents the riding of dollard. 
he thinks it would be a good election if the city of kirkland, which is part of the riding, be recognized and that henceforth, the riding is called dollard-kirkland. 
this is an example, because kirkland is not following in dollard county.  
however, what has never been said - the chief government whip, the honorable senator mercier, understands this very well, since we have worked together on these issues - is that no one seems to be paying attention to the costs. immense that it represents for elections canada each time we change the name of a riding. 
i recently learned that this may cause logistical problems. 
regarding the memory capacity of computers, among other things, this becomes an impossibility or you have to pay the price.  
i was the member for the riding of montreal-saint-denis, which was represented by mr. azellus denis, who was a member for 29 years and a senator for 28 years. 
incidentally, denis holds the record for one who, since 1867, has served in parliament for more than 54 years. 
that's something we should at least point out, although i didn't always agree with him. 
there had always been pressure to change the name of the riding of saint-denis.  
i represented a new neighborhood which was part, in mr. trudeau's time, of the riding of mount-royal. 
this district was called parc-extension. 
politically, it would have been good for me to say that it was the riding of saint-denis-parc-extension, but i would have had to add the riding of papineau. 
after that, i couldn't forget rosemont, where i live. 
it is as if the current member for mont-royal wanted his riding from now on to be called mont-royal-cote-des-neiges, for example. 
there would then be political problems in hampstead and cote-saint-luc. 
this would become the riding of mont-royal-cote-saint-luc-hampstead-cote-des-neiges. 
i have nothing against it, but no one has ever told us how much each of these changes costs.  
you will recall that i was one of those who - and i have never apologized for it - were accused of letting the law take its course when there was talk of amending the election act and freeze in time electoral reform and redistribution.  
in one small gesture, the senate saved the government between five and seven million dollars. 
it is true that this government was unhappy with my decision, but i do not have to apologize for having saved such an amount by my stubbornness, by my "hard head", as i was told at this time. time right here in the senate. 
no one remembers that members of parliament were denied their whim by not amending the elections act. 
everyone was re-elected. 
everyone was happy. 
his name was joe, he was canadian and he was very happy. 
but that's another debate.  
senator rompkey offers us, without naming them, a list of very long names. 
this means that when the chief electoral officer receives assent from parliament, it will be over. 
he will have no other choice but to modify the electoral maps. 
each time, i present the same objections. 
at some point, i will not only have objections, i will try to convince honorable senators of what i am saying, that there should be no change of riding name between two elections. 
parliament should have the wisdom to do this. 
when there has been a redistribution, let it hold until the next election. 
it's so reasonable that i wonder why we don't do it. 
thus, we are saving millions of dollars which could be used to help international organizations or associations like the international parliamentary union, which makes big speeches in the world and which, with a little money, could promote democracy and peace in the world.  
if i'm not here when the committee meets, i hope you won't forget to ask these questions. 
how much does it cost? 
i don't want to play the philosopher here. 
how much does each change that occurs between elections cost?  
the honorable noel a. kinsella (deputy leader of the opposition):
i fully agree with some of the principles raised by senator prud'homme. 
in particular, i would highlight the issue of the process underlying this bill.  
when a simple bill arrives in the senate, it is passed quickly, but when we enter into a process of thinking about a bill, we inevitably raise questions of principle such as the one concerning the process. 
usually, you think that changing the name of a riding depends on serious, serious circumstances, like the redistribution of ridings. 
they therefore change the name when they wish. 
in addition, if i remember correctly, the ridings in the province of ontario have the same names, the territorial boundaries of the ridings being the same for the provincial as for the federal one. 
when a change like this occurs, it therefore directly affects the situation of a province. 
as all senators are well aware, when a bill concerns the provinces, a rule of the senate stipulates that the provinces have the right to be consulted. 
this is another question of principle that arises. 
having said that, i would like to move the adjournment of the debate in the name of the honorable senator nolin.  
(on motion of senator kinsella, for senator nolin, debate adjourned.)  
privileges, rules and procedures 
fourth report of the committee-debate adjourned 
the senate proceeded to the consideration of the fourth report of the standing senate committee on privileges, rules and procedures (questions of privilege raised by the honorable senators andreychuk and bacon), presented to the senate on april 13, 2000 .- ( 
the honorable senator austin, pc). 
he said: honorable senators, i would like to make a few comments on the fourth report of the standing senate committee on privileges, rules and procedures. 
the report is based on two senate references, the first being that of october 13, 1999, which resulted from a question of privilege raised by the honorable andreychuk regarding the unauthorized disclosure of a report of the standing senate committee on aboriginal peoples which appeared in the national post on saturday september 11, 1999. the second question of privilege dealt with in this report was raised by senator baconle november 24, 1999 and relates to articles which appeared in the sun and the toronto star.  
the senate concluded that each of the questions of privilege raised in the senate was valid and referred those questions to committee. 
the committee considered these two questions of privilege.  
senator andreychuk asked the committee not to seek to lay blame, but rather to examine committee practice and make recommendations regarding this practice and how committees and their chairs could reduce, if not avoid, leakage. reports. 
i do not need to explain to honorable senators that the leaked reports are of concern to the senate. 
the senate took the question of privilege very seriously.  
senator bacon would like the standing committee to investigate his question of privilege more actively, especially because of the risk that the leak of the draft report could harm some people and that prior knowledge of certain data could provide financial benefits.  
as part of its study of the two cases, the committee looked at what was the practice in the other place, in the british house of commons as well as in the senate and house of representatives of australia. .  
we believe there were many lessons to be learned from british and australian practices. 
as a result of experience, the practice has evolved so that the committee where the violation is said to have been committed is the first to investigate, following a motion it proposes, the idea being that the committee being more directly affected should therefore, as soon as a violation has occurred, investigate the possible causes of the violation and the liability in this regard.  
that would in no way prevent a senator from raising the matter in the senate itself. 
however, in the event that a committee reports to the senate that it is undertaking an inquiry on a question of privilege, the chair would defer debate on the question of privilege until the committee reports, whether or not that report concludes. that there is a matter of privilege. 
the committee in question would then be asked to determine whether the question of privilege caused significant damage. 
this request would be made to him in order to set a target for determining the penalties to be taken by the standing committee on privileges, rules and procedures.  
the way the process would work would be as follows. 
if the committee on which the leak is alleged to have occurred reports that in its opinion the question of privilege appears to be justified on its face, that it has made an investigation and the investigation has concluded that the leak has caused slight or substantial prejudice, a report would be tabled in the senate for debate and which, in its wisdom, either accept the report of the committee in question or accept the report and send the matter to the standing committee on privileges, rules and regulations. the procedure which would decide the sanctions to be taken by the senate.  
this is the practice in the british house of commons as well as the senate and house of representatives in australia, which recommend themselves to our committee. 
we make a similar recommendation in our report.  
we have, honorable senators, other recommendations regarding committee practice. 
we believe that greater awareness of the confidential nature of documents and committee reports is needed. 
in our report, we asked that committee chairs be more careful when circulating committee reports, that they not circulate draft reports except to senators, that they number the reports in question, and that they number the reports in question. '' they identify everyone present at meetings held behind closed doors. 
we have asked committee chairs not to allow anyone other than senators and committee staff to be in the room except if they feel it is necessary and not to allow anyone to stay in the room. on the pretext that they are staff members of various senators. 
we have requested that the names of everyone present during an in camera session be noted.  
we also warned about senate employees, about people who are permanent employees. 
there is indeed a confidentiality provision in their contract, but in our opinion they should be given further advice - although we have no complaints, at least for the time being.  
let us not forget, however, the problem posed by people hired on a temporary basis, contract agents. 
these people are called upon because of their particular skills which are useful to the committee; however, these experts do not necessarily adhere to senate practices or do not feel comfortable with our way of doing things.
it follows that, in certain cases, these experts also have an opinion of their own and, if they happen to be in disagreement with the direction that a committee seems to take on a particular file , they may very well decide to adopt a contradictory attitude.  
in a letter to the committee, senator pearson raised various issues relating to the in camera business. 
the committee gave this letter a very favorable reception, deeming it relevant to its work. 
in the sixth edition of beauchesne, it is specified that the committees must make clear decisions regarding the distribution of draft reports, the treatment to be reserved for testimony and the full publication of their minutes.  
since we reported to the senate, the privilege of the standing senate committee on banking, trade and commerce has been violated again. 
in its report, our committee recommends that the committee whose privilege was breached conduct the initial investigation. 
as the senate has not yet debated, discussed or judged our report, i simply ask to inform honorable senators that tomorrow the standing senate committee on privileges, rules and procedures will begin to act as if it were the committee. the privilege which would have been violated. 
we are going to conduct an investigation that will hopefully help establish the model by which committees deal with these kinds of issues. 
hopefully there will be very few of these questions in the future.  
in terms of penalties, the uk and australia take breaches of privilege very seriously. 
in addition, in these countries, a journalist responsible for disclosing a committee report is usually found guilty of breach of privilege. 
sanctions, which usually relate to the right to use the precincts of parliament, are imposed.  
freedom of the press and the custom of the two houses not dealing with journalists found guilty of breach of privilege are not new. 
let me explain. 
the committee i represent is not recommending that action be taken against journalists.  
as i pointed out last week in the senate, the journalist who published excerpts from the banking committee's report made it clear in his article that he was citing a draft report that had not yet been published. 
he hinted that it would be released in the coming weeks. 
in britain and australia, this would have clearly been a breach of privilege on the part of the journalist.  
i do not do justice to the text of this report. 
i urge honorable senators to read it. 
it is not long and it is well written. 
the standing committee on privileges, rules and procedures ask the senate to receive and approve its report and adopt the new procedure which i have outlined in relation to questions of privilege. 
i believe this system is more practical than the one provided for in the current rules.  
the honorable anne c. cools:
honorable senators, i thank the honorable senator austin for his excellent work. 
i have reviewed this report with interest. 
the honorable senator referred in his speech to a letter from senator pearson. 
in the report itself, in paragraph 31, we talk about this letter. 
to the extent that the committee received senator pearson's letter, perhaps the senate should benefit from this letter as well. 
would senator austin please table a copy?  
senator austin:
honorable senators, i will see if this letter is personal and confidential or if it contains restrictions. 
i will then respond to the honorable senator. 
i would like to speak to the author of the letter to obtain her consent in this regard.  
senator cools:
here is what the committee report says: 
in a letter dated december 8, 1999, senator landon pearson raised several issues relating to the in camera proceedings of committees that are relevant to the matters considered in this report.  
i can only assume that, to the extent that you mentioned it in senate hansard, you intended to make it known to the senate. 
it makes perfect sense to me. 
since you are asking the senate to approve your study, it is entirely appropriate that the senate obtain a copy of this document.  
senator austin:
honorable senators, senator pearson is here. 
maybe she could help us.  
senator cools:
i have no objection to this.  
the honorable landon pearson:
honorable senators, i will discuss this with senator austin. 
i have no objection to this letter being tabled in the senate. 
i'll make sure it's the right version, as i've made some changes and improvements to it with the help of a few colleagues. 
we will discuss it, but i have no objection in principle to the request of the honorable senator cools.  
the honorable marcel prud'homme:
you drop it or not. 
senator cools:
honorable senators, this is an interesting situation. 
the letter's author, senator pearson, said he was ready to table her letter in the senate. 
senator austin says he has concerns about confidentiality. 
it almost justifies raising a whole new question of privilege, which i would gladly do. 
can such a letter be confidential when the honorable senator austin requests that the senate approve the report? 
we can settle this question another day.  
senator austin:
honorable senators, i will answer senator cools as follows. 
it is important that the chair of a committee take good care of the documents that are presented. 
i would do the same for any senator. 
i would ask him if he has any objections. 
i am delighted that senator pearson has allayed my concern about the correct way to proceed.  
i would just like to add that paragraph 31 does not contain a recommendation the committee is asking for adoption or for inclusion in the standing orders. 
this is an observation on how closed hearings might be conducted. 
it is not part of our report on questions of privilege.  
senator cools:
honorable senators, the matter under consideration is the adoption of the entire report, unless senator austin says that part is not contained in the report.  
we should congratulate the rules committee, because some of these issues have been on the horizon for a very long time. 
in recent years, senator kinsella and i have raised a number of questions of privilege, in the hope that at some point the senate would give them serious consideration. 
so i'm delighted with the intense work that the committee has done.  
regarding the leaks, senator austin knows that i have strong views on breach of trust and disclosure of important information to the media.  
seems like not a day goes by without a newspaper talking about another leak. 
at one time, these incidents never involved the senate. 
i will not address the issue today. 
i just wanted to ask these questions of senator austin. 
having said that, i will adjourn the debate to return to the subject at greater length.  
(on motion of senator cools, debate adjourned.)  
national defense 
the need for canada to join the united states for the national missile defense program - inquiry - debate continued 
the agenda calls for: 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the honorable senator forrestall calling the attention of the senate to the need for canada to join the united states for the purposes of the national missile defense program .- ( 
the honorable senator taylor). 
the honorable douglas roche:
honorable senators, the fact that the government plans to have cabinet study canada's participation in the national missile defense system that is being developed in the united states brings renewed importance to the debate. 
senator forrestall, who enjoys the great respect in the senate for his long service in both houses of parliament, made an important contribution to the discussion. 
first, the $ 60 billion nmd defense system is designed to protect all 50 states of the united states from small-scale attacks using intercontinental ballistic missiles. 
the main argument used to justify the immediate deployment of the device is the possibility that emerging states with missiles and hostile to the united states, such as north korea, may soon acquire icbms and use them to attack american territory. 
this device is based on very advanced technology.  
however, it is precisely the deployment of such a device that the anti-missile treaty signed by the united states and the former soviet union was supposed to prevent. 
this treaty aimed to prohibit the erection of defensive systems in order to discourage the construction of more offensive weapons to overcome them. 
the united states recognizes that the nmd device goes against the treaty and is pushing for russia to amend or repeal it altogether.  
documents regarding the ongoing negotiations between the united states and russia were published in the new york times on april 28. 
as the union of concerned scientists explains in these documents, the united states asserts that russia need not fear that the american nmd defense system undermines the russian nuclear deterrent for two reasons. 
first, the united states maintains that the two countries will possess, under any possible subsequent arms reduction agreement, strategic offensive weapons arsenals that will be large and diverse, and that the two countries could deploy more than 1,000 icbms. and ballistic missiles equipped with nuclear warheads and launched from submarines over the next decade and years to come, which would give both countries "the ability to conduct a destructive counterattack. ".  
these documents, which were originally obtained by the bulletin of the atomic scientist, show that in order to deploy its nmd defense system, the united states is prepared to give up indefinitely the possibility of reducing the russian arsenal to less than 1,000 missiles. 
if the united states tells russia that russia's maintenance of a vast arsenal for the indefinite future is its protection against an american nmd defense, then it cannot credibly argue that it is adopting also measures for a marked reduction or elimination of nuclear weapons.  
yet last week, at the united nations nuclear non-proliferation treaty review conference, which i attended, secretary of state albright and other officials the united states has sought to reassure the rest of the world that the united states remains committed to fulfilling its obligations under the non-proliferation treaty to seek nuclear disarmament. 
these documents show how hollow the assurances given are.  
it would be an understatement to say that the intentions of the united states have caused a stir in the international community. 
they caused consternation. 
the issue has not only divided the united states and russia, but it has virtually isolated our southern neighbors from the rest of the world. 
even the nuclear partners and staunchest allies of the united states have publicly tried to dissuade the united states from moving forward because of the irreparable damage it will cause to the nuclear disarmament program.  
russian foreign minister igor ivanov has warned the united states that arsenal reduction programs will be in jeopardy if the united states goes ahead with the nmd defense. 
the anti-ballistic missile treaty, which deals with anti-ballistic missile systems, is a cornerstone of the non-proliferation regime and, in the minister's opinion, it should not be tampered with. 
while ms. albright said that there was no good reason for changing the treaty, mr. ivanov simply said this: 
compliance with the treaty in its current form and without modification is a prerequisite for any further negotiation on nuclear disarmament.  
in his speech to the united nations, he said the same thing on several occasions. 
he said this: 
further reductions in strategic offensive weapons can only be considered in the context of preserving the anti-missile treaty.  
in other words, honorable senators, if the nmd defense system goes ahead, we can say goodbye to nuclear disarmament.  
china is very cautious about a us-russian deal on the nmd defense system. 
chinese ambassador sha zukang intervened during the npt review, criticizing any ballistic missile defense system as a serious threat to global strategic stability and balance. 
he accused the united states of trying to organize absolute security for their country, an impossible task that involves the accumulation of nuclear weapons. 
he warned, explaining that the process of international nuclear disarmament would collapse if the united states went ahead with the nmd defense system.  
although more cautious, the united kingdom and france, nuclear allies of the united states, have both voiced similar concerns. 
peter hain, uk minister of state said, and i quote: 
active missile defense raises complex issues. 
we made it clear ...  
... in the united states and russia ...  
... that we still recognize the value of the anti-missile missile treaty and that we want to see it preserved.  
french ambassador hubert de la fortelle said his country was "keen to avoid any challenge to the treaty which would risk upsetting the strategic balance and restarting the arms race".  
in addition, javier solana, former nato secretary general, speaking on behalf of the european union, said that the nmd program could actually "break the security bond between the united states and its allies within the united states. nato, which would really risk leading to chaos ".  
honorable senators, the united states keeps saying it must protect itself from the pariah states and it focuses attention on north korea, iraq and iran, but there is no evidence that any of these country could manufacture a nuclear warhead. 
by international standards, north korea's missile program is primitive. 
in addition, the united states and north korea are making progress on a collaborative agenda to eliminate the threat posed by missiles from north korea. 
a historic summit between north korea and south korea appears imminent. 
the current trend is that north korea's economy is in danger of collapsing; the trend towards democratization in iran could change the orientation of this country; finally, post-saddam hussein iraq could re-establish friendly relations with the west.  
in short, the threat from other countries is fading; yet defenders of the nmd program claim that an enemy is lurking precisely because they must be able to spot an enemy somewhere to gain the support of american taxpayers.
further, as the brilliant american analyst frances fitzgerald points out in her book, way out there in the blue, the nmd program follows the now-discredited strategic defense initiative of the 1980s, known as name of "star wars" and led by the american extreme right which seeks unilateral security impossible to the detriment of the agreements concluded for 30 years on the control of the arms and the disarmament.  
the goal of this gang of ideologues who control the united states congress is to prepare the ground for american military domination in outer space. 
the specter of a puny north korea as the raison d'etre of the nmd defense system is nothing but a subterfuge camouflaging the real objective, which is the development of weapons in space and the preparation for wars in space. 21st century spatial character. 
in all of this, the profits of the military industrial complex, which have already reached unmatched heights thanks to the us $ 280 billion defense budget, will be spectacular.  
honorable senators, the nmd device is a trap set in canada.  
as canada is the geographic partner of the united states in north america, canada-united states defense has been intimately linked for decades. 
the norad agreement, born during the cold war to counter soviet missile attacks, is an expression of the structural relationship between canada and the united states. 
norad structural arrangements and nato defense systems cannot be lightly tampered with. 
in any event, a concerted campaign of intimidation by canada aimed at coercing canada into contributing to the nmd scheme project has been initiated. 
its loudest supporters are the insignificant pentagon colonels, as ex-prime minister trudeau once called them, who try to instill in canadians fear that the united states will stop protecting canada if it does not. do not. 
foreign minister lloyd axworthy has come under attack because he told the united nations two weeks ago that the proposed unilateral national missile defense system would have serious repercussions on the npt regime. 
as i said before, mr. axworthy was moderate compared to the rest of the international community.  
honorable senators, in the late 1980s, when canada was invited to join the american star wars program, the united states made the same gratuitous threats if canada refused. 
after careful consideration, the canadian government said no. what happened?
if canada was able to say no to the madness of missile defense during the cold war, why could we not - politely, of course, as befits our role in international diplomacy - say no during the post-cold war era?  
the time has come - and countless canadians are watching what is going on in ottawa closely to see how we respond to this file - for the government of canada to affirm that the first priority of canadians is to enrich life. set of international laws that constitute the united nations system, without succumbing to the american militarists who want nothing better than to announce to the whole world that this country so respected that is canada has adopted the nmd defense system. 
canada must not be fooled into a project that is driven by the internal politics of the united states. 
if canada were to participate in this nmd defense system project, it could have catastrophic consequences for our ability to continue to promote the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. 
canada currently plays an important role in ensuring that the non-proliferation treaty, currently under review in new york, continues to act as a bulwark against the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
it is in this direction that canada's efforts must continue.  
finally, the solution to the upcoming threats to ballistic missiles will be to preserve and strengthen the current web of military, political, economic and legal measures designed to prohibit, hinder, isolate and expose the activities of potentially hostile states and non-state interests and to address them. 
voices:
well done!  
the honorable marcel prud'homme:
i would like to ask senator roche a question. 
the senator was kind enough to quote the words of the minister of foreign affairs, mr. axworthy, but to better understand the intensity of the debate, could the senator tell us what he thinks of the comments of the minister of national defense? , who seems to disagree completely with mr. axworthy? 
i must admit that i was quite disturbed to see, for the first time in my 37 years in parliament, two ministers in positions of importance "perceived" to be in complete disagreement. 
to better understand his solid point of view, a point of view which i understand since i share it, could the senator give us his opinion on the opinion of the minister of national defense in the face of the position that minister axworthy has so well? stated?  
senator roche:
honorable senators, i do not believe that the minister of national defense, mr. eggleton, for whom i have great respect, has made a definitive statement in this regard. 
he expressed great reservations. 
i do not think i can do mr. eggleton justice without a definitive statement from him. 
the honorable bill rompkey:
honorable senators, i find senator roche's arguments very compelling and i congratulate him on his intervention.  
there seems to be a disagreement over whether or not these unscrupulous states have nuclear capability. 
a few weeks ago i was in washington where pentagon officials told me that four or five pariah states had the capacity to reach the united states with nuclear weapons. 
either they were misinformed, or they were deliberately trying to mislead us. 
i don't like the idea that pentagon officials can do this. 
i am confused. 
if in fact these states have weapons and if in fact those weapons can reach the united states, then the question is what will the united states do to protect itself since some of these pariah states are not taking part? international structures set up for nuclear disarmament.  
the second question is quite inexplicable, but could the honorable senator enlighten me on the first?  
senator roche:
i believe that a concerted campaign is underway and that old methods of propaganda are being used to convince the population that they are in danger, on the pretext that certain countries have weapons. 
the countries that have been mentioned - iran, iraq and north korea - do not have nuclear weapons. 
they don't have the strike capacity to reach the united states. 
in addition, with regard to their participation in international agreements, these three countries adhere to the non-proliferation treaty. 
former defense secretary perry led a delegation to north korea on behalf of the united states to forge relations between the two countries. 
the united states has already spent huge amounts to finance the manufacture of reactors in north korea, for peaceful use. 
the partnership that can be established, as evidenced by the fact that a summit will be held soon between north korea and south korea, illustrates that the alleged adaptation of delinquent countries that put us in danger is greatly exaggerated by those who seek to gain political, economic and military capital by alarming the population.  
(on motion of senator taylor, debate adjourned.)  
the future of canada's defense policy 
interpellation 
the agenda calls for: 
resuming debate on the inquiry of the honorable senator forrestall calling the attention of the senate to the future of canada's defense policy .- ( 
the honorable senator rompkey, pc). 
the honorable bill rompkey:
honorable senators, i am very pleased to address the subject raised by the honorable senator opposite. 
i must say that my observations will be both complimentary and complementary. 
i commend the honorable senator for raising this issue. 
i admit that i agree with him on a good part of what he said, perhaps not on everything, but on a good part. 
i hope my observations will reflect that.  
in 1994, i had the privilege of co-chairing the special joint committee to study canadian defense policy. 
in fact, my co-chair sits to my right. 
i was in the other place then, and he was in the senate. 
senator forrestall was a member of that committee. 
we produced the final report, "security in a changing world," which was our defense policy review. 
i can say that at the time canada was one of the few countries in the world where a parliamentary review was done before a bureaucratic and government review.  
we were very happy because with the publication of the white paper it was stated, in accordance with our wishes, the canadian forces must be versatile, combat capable and able to fight alongside the best armies. 
the white paper recognizes that while we cannot cover the entire military spectrum, the canadian forces must be able to defend canada and defend north america in cooperation with the united states. two-thirds of our recommendations were found in the white paper.
we were happy. 
this reaction was a comfort to us as parliamentarians. 
however, when you take a closer look, you see that some of the most important recommendations were not taken up, and that is what i would like to emphasize today.  
some of the committee's recommendations that were rejected had to do with the defense budget and the size of the regular force. 
because of the rejection of these two fundamental aspects, the architects of our defense policy have significantly reduced the ability of the canadian forces to achieve the objectives set by the government.  
of course, the defense policy objectives set out in the 1994 white paper remain valid. 
however, there is a strong doubt in my mind, as in senator forrestall's mind, i believe, that the canadian forces of today are capable of carrying them out.  
the white paper did not respond to this fundamental recommendation, and that is how defense budgets were cut by 23%. 100, or $ 2 billion, since 1994.
what is more, the regular forces have grown from 75,000 to 60,000 in recent years, despite the joint committee's warning that a number of 66,700 members is the minimum capacity necessary for the canadian forces to play a role. significant at home and abroad.  
even though the dnd budget has been cut by 23%. in the 1990s, more recent and more intense pressure on the military to perform many missions abroad prompted the government to invest new money there.
events such as the withdrawal of the canadian forces from peacekeeping missions in kosovo and the delays in the deployment of peacekeepers to east timor following the breakdowns of our transport aircraft are among the most serious causes. more obvious ones that forced the government to act and financially help the cash strapped canadian forces.  
the national defense budget has been increased for the second time since the presentation of the 2000 federal budget. 
according to this budget, the canadian forces will receive $ 1.7 billion in new money over three years. 
that is, $ 400 million in 2000-2001, $ 500 million for the next fiscal year and $ 600 million the next. 
the department of defense says the increase in its budget will allow it to counter possible layoffs of soldiers and to start purchasing new equipment, including 28 maritime helicopters to replace the sea kings, to modernize the cf- 18, aurora patrol planes and hercules planes. 
while the military is happy with these increases after decades of cuts, it is not enough compared to the increases our allies, australia and the united states, have given to their respective military.  
we also have to take into account that 10% of eighty percent of that new money has already been spent because the department of defense owes the federal government $ 180 million for loans that the latter has taken out to fund the year 2000 adaptation.
the ministry has also already committed to using much of the rest of the money to fund programs designed to improve quality of life. 
between the funds devoted to peacekeeping and the portion allocated to paying the debt and improving the quality of life, no other additional sum will be invested in capital equipment, training or sectors. who are in desperate need of more money. 
this limited supply of new money hardly increases the basic budget. 
the military will still have to scramble to keep the number of employees above 60,000 and to pay for new equipment.  
just as important as inadequate funding is the reduction of military personnel. 
despite the considerable increase in the defense ministry's budget, the effective number of troops may well drop below the 60,000 mark indicated in this year's white paper. 
in fact, the canadian forces will withdraw soldiers from peacekeeping missions to increase the number of troops on foreign soil from 4,500 to 3,000 since the increases will not allow the canadian forces to maintain the current level of strength. deployed overseas.  
despite the support it receives, the fact remains that the institution is functioning beyond its capacities. 
it is less and less evident that canada's armed forces can maintain their current operational load. 
many men and women are already completing their fourth or fifth overseas mission in seven years. 
the repeated deployments of our military undermine canada's ability to deal with sensitive situations.  
i would like to say a few words about the conditions to which our armed forces are exposed. 
for several years now, the ministry of national defense has been emphasizing quality of life programs and the changes made have been convincing. 
a significant portion of the budget allocated in the 2000 budget will be devoted to the program to improve the quality of life, including increased pay, benefits and disability allowances. 
there is no doubt that the funds injected into the quality of life programs are invested wisely. 
but we have proof that additional funding is required to face the other crisis facing the armed forces.  
another very important aspect of our armed forces is the reserve forces. 
the department of national defense has decided to act on the 36 recommendations made in the report of the special committee on the reorganization of the reserve forces. 
he has already completed eight of them, four of which relate to support for cadets and canadian rangers programs, and four more relate to the general makeup of canada's armed forces and the need to eliminate administrative differences between the regular and canadian forces. reserve forces.  
the harmonization of pay and benefits, which is essential for staff, is advancing rapidly thanks to this program, which considerably improves the remuneration of reserve staff. 
reserve force pay rates are now set at 85%. 100 of the regular force rates and all future compensation initiatives will apply to all members of the canadian forces.  
the implementation of the other 28 recommendations is underway, and most of them focus on the restructuring of the land force reserve which is taking place in two concurrent phases. 
so far, the first phase, which focuses on infrastructure and manning, has added manpower to replace 14 militia districts with an initial organization of 10 brigade groups. 
there remains the challenge of restructuring at the unit level, which could entail some adjustments to regimental organizations; this task will be the main objective in the coming months.
the second phase will focus on longer term elements, including training, mobilization, equipment, policies and musics.  
i look forward to receiving john fraser's report. 
however, i am concerned because it seems that there may be some differences between the content of this report and the future plans of the department. 
our task is determined in advance because we will have to closely follow the progress of the restructuring of the reserve forces.  
in its 1998-1999 interim report, the minister's review committee for change severely criticized the implementation of reforms affecting the restructuring of the reserve forces. 
ministerial decisions to organize the restructuring process have not been implemented. 
the committee found that the canadian forces have abandoned most of the main principles of restructuring and accomplished too little since the 1988 and 1999 reviews. 
while reserve forces can, and do, support the regular force both abroad and at home, they can only be relied on to a certain extent. 
after trying in the early 1990s to deploy peacekeeping contingents with a high proportion of reservists - up to 40%. in fact - the canadian forces then limited to 20%. 100 the number of reservists in a contingent because of training costs and loss of cohesion within the unit.  
defense projects, as described in defense planning guide 2000 and strategy 2020, place great importance on rapid response to emerging crises, a task that reservists cannot easily and economically accomplish. 
additionally, the lack of a guaranteed recall means that domestic operations must rely on a significant number of regular force members, even if large numbers of reservists are deployed.  
as always, the deciding factor seems to be money. 
the lack of funds also has a very negative effect on training and equipment. 
this then has an impact on the readiness and fundamental capability of the canadian forces. 
almost half of the ministry's budget cuts were met from the hardware budget. 
in 1996, following a series of budget cuts, the department made a commitment to avoid repeating the experience of the 1970s when the condition of equipment became a serious problem. 
despite this commitment, long-term investment programs and defense service programs currently forecast a decline in equipment spending over the next 5 to 15 years.  
the capital budget of the canadian forces is now about 90%. 100 of the overall budget.
the auditor general warned in 1998 that dnd ran the risk of seeing its equipment end up being too old and deteriorating if the capital budget did not increase.  
strategy 2020, which was put in place last summer, sets a five-year target of 23%. 100 of the defense budget for investments.
however, dnd's last attempt to reach a target for materiel purchases in the late 1980s and early 1990s was unsuccessful.  
honorable senators, inadequate funding has resulted in numerous delays and cancellations in the procurement process. 
inadequate materiel has also compromised the capability of the canadian forces, in their missions abroad and in canada. 
there are significant gaps in strategic surveillance and only limited capacity to exercise our country's will in the very demanding environment of the canadian arctic. 
inadequate resources also mean that canada is finding it increasingly difficult to keep up with technological advances.  
the house of commons national defense committee has done useful work, including its study and report on the quality of life in the armed forces, but it has failed to address the central operational issues that haunt the canadian forces and undermine the mission of dnd. 
nato has expressed the view that canada is not doing its part in multilateral and bilateral security organizations.  
his honor the acting speaker:
i regret to inform the honorable senator rompkey that his speaking time has expired. 
is there unanimous consent for the honorable senator to continue?  
voices:
okay.  
senator rompkey:
thank you. 
i am almost finished, honorable senators.  
nato secretary general lord robertson has noted that canada ranks second last among nato members in defense spending as a percentage of gdp. 
despite all our pretexts, we are far from being the only country facing financial constraints and the restructuring of its armed forces. 
defense spending has declined in most nato countries, but canada's overall spending remains among the lowest. 
in 1997, canada spent 1.3%. 100 of its gdp to defense, against 3.4 p. 100 in the united states, 2.7%. 100 in the uk and 1.6 p. 100 in germany.  
canadians also view the means of action of our forces with skepticism. 
according to a poll by the toronto firm pollara carried out in early 1999, 69% 100% of respondents believe that the military do not have the necessary equipment to do their job.
parliament is only beginning to question further cuts to the defense budget. 
many mps are now calling for a five-year program of budget increases. 
the difficulties are well known. 
increased pressures to respond to outbreaks of violence around the world place an additional burden on services, and technological advances are revolutionizing the way wars are waged. 
in this volatile environment, our forces have suffered massive cuts. 
over the past decade, the number of military missions has tripled, but the number of members of the armed forces has fallen from 90,000 to less than 60,000 in the year 2000-2001.  
we just haven't done enough. 
partial measures and partial successes are unacceptable. 
canadians deserve better.  
the honorable colin kenny:
honorable senators, will the honorable senator accept a question?  
senator rompkey:
of course.  
senator kenny:
i would like to associate myself with the comments made by the honorable senator rompkey. 
i had the opportunity to sit on the special committee which was so well chaired by senators rompkey and de bane.  
senator rompkey:
honorable senators, that is a difficult question to answer. 
we wonder what the committee would have recommended if it had known. 
i think we were right in our recommendations. 
we set a limit. 
however, i do not believe that this limit was respected. 
i think we have fallen below that threshold. 
the reality now is that i believe, i believe, i believe many others, that we do not have the capacity to fulfill all the missions that we have undertaken here and abroad. 
we have made certain commitments to canadians, norad, nato and the united nations. 
i don't think we can meet all of our commitments, given the structure and budget in place right now.  
i am disappointed that the threshold we set was not met. 
i believe it is incumbent on us as parliamentarians to continue to provide oversight. 
i believe the senate has a role to play in securing the passage of what we recommended in 1994. 
the honorable j. michael forrestall:
honorable senators, i too have a question for the honorable senator rompkey. 
first of all, i want to thank him for his speech. 
i would be tempted to ask his co-chair if he agrees. 
i would like the honorable senator to say whether we have not failed in our responsibilities a little by not calling more insistently - and i regret that the co-chair of the committee is not here at this time - the establishment , either through the senate or in concert with the other place, of the oversight mechanism that would have enabled us and canadians - by giving us their opinion - to make it clear that we are long past the point dilapidated.  
i can inform honorable senators that the numbers we believe to be correct for the canadian forces are overestimated. 
we see it in the evacuation from sierra leone. 
does the honorable senator think it would be helpful if the senate went it alone? 
is it worth the struggle? 
if this is your threshold, then let's take a chance. 
let's see if we can get results. 
senator roche and i are engaged in a debate on the nmd defense system. 
i would like senators - and i am sure the honorable senator rompkey will agree with me - to participate in a debate on this defense. 
this is crucial.  
i also wonder about the platform. 
i know that it is late, that people are hungry and want to go home, but these subjects will be more adequately studied by an interested committee which knows about the field. 
we don't have the resources. 
could the honorable senator comment on this aspect? 
it is about an nmd defense, a precise operation, and maintenance and capital budgets. 
it is absolutely necessary to look at the issue and produce a green paper and a white paper. 
it is essential that the government benefit from our excellent knowledge in these areas. 
could the honorable senator comment on all of this?  
senator rompkey:
i will do it with pleasure. 
i'm glad this issue has been raised. 
it is something that we can do there. 
in recent years, many of us have supported the establishment of a standing senate committee on national defense and security. 
i am far from the idea of   putting the deputy leader of the government and the deputy leader of the opposition in the hot seat, but i notice that they are both in the senate and that they have carefully followed the debate and listened to the question. raised by the honorable senator forrestall, as well as the response. 
far be it from me to put them on the spot today; i simply want to remind them that many senators believe that the creation of a standing senate committee on defense and security should have been done a long time ago and that we should see it now, because there is work to be done. make.  
his honor the acting speaker:
honorable senators, if no other senator wishes to speak, i consider the debate on this inquiry closed.  
prime minister's visit to the middle east and the persian gulf region 
inquiry-adjournment of debate 
the honorable pierre de bane, having given notice on thursday, may 4, 2000: 
she said: honorable senators, i have the honor to report to this chamber on the visit undertaken from april 8 to 20 by the prime minister of canada, the right honorable jean chretien, to several countries of the middle east, namely israel, palestine, egypt, lebanon, jordan, syria and saudi arabia.  
i was very happy that the prime minister invited several parliamentarians from both houses of our parliament to accompany him. 
it was the first time in canadian history that the head of the canadian government made such an extensive visit, covering so many countries in this region where we have been involved, however, for so long.  
we could even say that the decisive role assumed by canada during the suez canal crisis in 1956 not only enabled us to resolve a crisis involving the two former mother countries of canada, namely france and england, but that this participation was also a very important moment in the history of our country.  
it was for playing a central role in defusing the suez canal crisis that the nobel peace prize was awarded to then foreign minister lester b. pearson, later prime minister from canada. 
it was during this crisis that canada introduced the modern concept of united nations peacekeeping.  
since then, canada has participated in all peacekeeping operations in the middle east, including those of the first and second emergency forces, the observation mission in yemen, the interim force in lebanon, the group of military observers for iran and iraq and the united nations special commission.  
it is canada's belief that peacekeeping activities contribute to stability in the region, which facilitates the peace process in the middle east. 
currently, 239 members of the canadian forces are participating in five peacekeeping and related missions in the middle east.  
in the golan heights, the united nations force observes the disengagement by the forces of israel and syria. 
we have 190 members of the canadian forces there, including one as a commander.  
the truce oversight body has 11 canadian forces members who mediate between egypt, israel, jordan, lebanon and syria, and assist other un missions.  
in addition, six members of the canadian forces are participating in the united nations iraq-kuwait observation mission.  
the multinational force and observers (fmo), which monitors the disengagement between israel and egypt under the camp david accords, has 30 members of the canadian forces assigned to staff, air traffic control and administration.  
finally, two canadians are part of the united nations monitoring, verification and inspection commission established in december 1999 to continue the inspection and destruction of iraq's ballistic missiles and chemical, nuclear and biological weapons.  
canada also participated in two united nations peacekeeping missions in lebanon, that of the observation group in 1958-1959 and that of the interim force in 1978.  
canada is a strong supporter of the middle east peace process, an active participant in multilateral negotiations and a major funder of aid programs in the region. 
canada has been participating in the efforts of the international community to secure peace in the middle east for almost 50 years.  
the madrid peace process was launched by the united states and the former soviet union in 1991, with the aim of finding a comprehensive solution to the arab-israeli conflict. 
the negotiations were long and arduous, reflecting the complexity of the issues and the compromises to be made to achieve lasting peace. 
the declaration of principle of israel and the palestine liberation organization (plo), signed in washington in 1993, the subsequent interim agreements, signed in 1994 and 1995, extending palestinian autonomy to the west bank and gaza , and the israeli-jordanian peace treaty signed in 1994 were highlights of these negotiations.  
in 1992, the united states and russia launched the second phase of the madrid peace process in moscow. 
foreign ministers and delegates from 36 countries - including representatives from the middle east, europe, japan, china and canada - were engaged.  
multilateral negotiations complement - not replace - bilateral negotiations. 
five working groups were set up: arms control and regional security, regional economic development, refugees, water resources and the environment. 
so far, syria and lebanon have decided not to participate until bilateral negotiations progress further.  
canada is a strong supporter of a negotiated solution to the arab-israeli conflict and fully supports the mechanism of bilateral negotiations. 
its main objective is to help countries in the middle east find ways to collaborate with each other.  
canada is one of the main partners in the multilateral process. 
he chairs the refugee working group and is a member of the steering group which has the task of overseeing the five working groups. 
canada is also a member of the ad hoc liaison committee and coordinates international assistance to the palestinian authority. 
the canadian minister of foreign affairs visited the region in 1997 to meet with arab and israeli leaders.  
canada is also a member of the regional security and arms control working group. 
as a facilitator of confidence-building measures in the maritime domain, he has hosted a number of events including the maritime safety symposium held in nova scotia in 1997. 
experts in search and rescue from the middle east were brought together for the occasion, at the invitation of the canadian coast guard and with the support of the canadian international development agency, cida.  
canada also provides technical know-how and development assistance to the water resources and environment working groups. 
under the aegis of cida, a training program for israeli, palestinian and jordanian technicians specializing in water data is currently being set up.  
the continuing crisis of palestinian refugees displaced by the arab-israeli conflict is one of the most important issues to be addressed in the middle east peace process. 
there are currently 3.6 million refugees registered with the united nations relief and works agency for palestine refugees in the near east. 
they live in jordan, lebanon, syria, as well as the west bank and gaza. 
all parties to the peace process recognize that finding a just solution to the refugee problem is fundamental to achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace in the middle east.  
under canada's chairmanship, the refugee working group, represented by mr. robinson, seeks to reunite families and improve the living conditions of refugees and internally displaced persons without violating their rights or future status. 
we know that the refugee issue is difficult and delicate. 
it is above all a matter of negotiations between israel and the palestinians, just like the questions of borders, settlements and jerusalem.  
the working group operates by consensus, according to rules set by all the members. 
the main topics under discussion are databases, human resource development - including workforce training and job creation - family reunification, development of economic and social infrastructure, child welfare and public health. 
canada has hosted two of the eight plenary sessions held so far.  
although lebanon is not part of the refugee working group, canada has worked with this state and other affected countries to secure international assistance for palestinian refugees in lebanon and ensure that the question of their future remains present on the international scene.  
the refugee working group assisted the united nations relief and works agency in raising funds for its peacebuilding program. 
he has raised over 90 million us dollars for projects to be carried out in the west bank, gaza, jordan, syria and lebanon. 
the group has provided financial support for training in public health, construction, small business, agriculture and public administration.  
he helped palestinian refugees in lebanon gain access to hospitals. 
it delivered medical supplies and sanitary equipment to the relief and works agency and the red crescent society for palestinians, and supported their clinics. 
the working group developed and partially funded a program to meet the urgent needs of palestinian children. 
members of the working group have also provided financial support to a large number of individual projects.  
the parties to the refugee working group share a common humanitarian goal of reuniting families separated during the arab-israeli conflict. 
their efforts made it possible to increase the contingent of people admitted to the west bank and gaza to reunite with their families. 
with the help of canada and kuwait, the relocation to gaza of some 500 families from camp canada in egypt's sinai is expected to be completed by the end of 2000.  
the refugee working group has sponsored several initiatives to collect and analyze background information with the aim of defining the scale of the refugee problem, setting priorities and assessing the impact of different policy options. . 
the working group constitutes a forum within which the regional parties can dialogue. 
the last meeting, held in paris in march 1999, dealt with family reunification.  
the working group also encourages dialogue with the refugees themselves by leading international missions to refugee camps, such as those in jordan in 1994, 1996 and 1999, as well as gaza and the west bank in 1998. missions similar studies were carried out in lebanon in 1994 and 1997. 
i wanted to set this backdrop of canada's contribution to this problem, which has been an immense tragedy for more than half a century.  
at the end of the visit that several parliamentarians in this house and in the other place made with the prime minister, i must say that it was the most exhaustive, the most complete visit ever undertaken by the head of the canadian government in this region. . 
it was a journey that was fraught with pitfalls, but there is no doubt that the game was worth the candle. 
we were personally struck by the extremely warm welcome the prime minister received everywhere, from jerusalem to jeddah.  
the prime minister outlined four main objectives for this trip, this visit to the middle east and the persian gulf. 
first, to show that canada continues to be committed to the search for a just, lasting and comprehensive peace, where dignity is respected. 
the prime minister encouraged all parties to keep this goal in mind. 
for us to have a just and comprehensive peace, dignity must be granted to everyone.  
also, the prime minister announced that a group of businessmen, under the direction of our minister for international trade, will visit the region by the end of the year.  
finally, the prime minister encouraged a dialogue on the values   of democracy, human rights, good governance and the rule of law. 
on the subject of the peace process, all interlocutors are familiar with canadian policy, based on united nations security council resolutions, and respect its fairness. 
we have participated in every peace mission since that time. 
both prime minister barak and president assad underscored the positive role played by canada in maintaining peace in the middle east.  
on the refugee issue, i have already indicated that canada's contributions to refugee aid is one of the most important and it chairs, as i said, the working group for refugees. 
during the prime minister's meeting with president arafat, the nobel peace prize winner, the latter warmly thanked canada for its leadership on the refugee issue and presented the prime minister of canada with a decoration.  
his honor the acting speaker:
your 15-minute period has expired. 
is leave granted to continue, honorable senators?  
voices:
okay.  
senator de bane:
in addition to decorating the prime minister, president arafat presented senator prud'homme with the order of bethlehem 2000. i have this decoration in hand here. 
senator prud'homme has worked tirelessly for many years to bring justice to the palestinian people, and i want to pay tribute to him.  
in addition, the canadian prime minister, mr. chretien, visited the refugees in the souf camp in jordan. 
he assured them that canada will do all it can to ensure that they are not forgotten by the rest of the world. 
he repeated to them that a fair and negotiated solution must be reached between the parties. 
on promotion, dialogue and values   in the region, the prime minister reminded everyone that canada's mission is to build bridges. 
the prime minister announced that the fund for dialogue and development is renewed for four years, in order to promote a rapprochement between the israelis and the arabs.  
regarding mine clearance, the prime minister announced an additional grant of $ 500,000 for mine clearance operations in the jordan valley. 
as for the priority of the population, men, women and children, the prime minister proposed the creation of a regional center for human security which would be based in amman, capital of jordan.  
king abdullah applauded this innovative proposal aimed at meeting the needs of people across the region. 
in lebanon, president lahoud told us that our little background gives us special credibility in the region. 
the jewish university of jerusalem has awarded an honorary doctorate to the prime minister of canada in recognition of mr. chretien's role in the advancement of peace throughout the region.  
the prime minister was the first foreign head of government to visit the arab community in israel, in nazareth, which is the main arab city in israel. 
mr. shimon peres, also a nobel peace prize winner, wanted to join the prime minister in speaking about tolerance and understanding to high school students at the seminary and at saint joseph's secondary school in nazareth, run by father shoufani, the parish priest of nazareth, who visited prime minister chretien last october.  
(2010) 
i would also like to say a word about trade and other forms of cooperation. 
i have seen the exceptional work that president ouellet and his team, along with other canadian companies, are doing to the great satisfaction of the lebanese government authorities. 
i believe that the visit of the canadian prime minister opened doors in high places for canadian businesses. 
i remember our meeting at the chamber of commerce in jeddah, saudi arabia, where all the important businessmen from saudi arabia were present for a dialogue with the prime minister. 
i have already mentioned that the minister for international trade, the honorable pierre pettigrew, will be visiting the region within a few months.  
the prime minister also pledged to israel to work with the palestinians to engage in high-tech partnerships.
in egypt, the prime minister, dr. alaf ebeid, publicly complimented canada. 
we are reliable partners who have technical expertise and excellent management skills.  
finally, to promote dialogue and canadian values, the prime minister has repeated on several occasions: 
we are not here to preach, but to share our expertise and experience.  
canada's experience may be relevant. 
our canadian charter of rights and freedoms inspired the supreme court of israel. 
prime minister chretien visited the chief justice of the supreme court of israel. 
the prime minister has not hesitated to discuss delicate subjects with his interlocutors. 
i am thinking of the question of human rights and the good governance of the palestinian authorities with syria, saudi arabia and honor killings in jordan. 
mr. chretien also spoke about the impact of globalization, tolerance in diversity and respect for human rights.  
at the dawn of the millennium, the prime minister recalled the essential nature of democracy, which makes it possible to release the energies of all the citizens of a country at the same time as to recognize their fundamental rights.  
in short, it was a visit that was exceptionally successful. 
we were told how much we esteemed canada, what canada has done for this region, one of the most troubled and suffering regions on the planet.  
in saudi arabia, i remember minister saud, son of king pisal, and minister of foreign affairs, who told us how much we appreciated the prime minister's frankness. 
he added that canada's traditional humility does not do justice to the importance of the role we play.  
in short, it was an exceptional visit, and this is attributable to the prime minister of canada, who had the courage to undertake this visit to the middle east. 
he was the first canadian head of government to undertake such an important visit.  
before addressing the main derogatory comments from some canadian journalists, i would like to pay tribute to the canadian diplomats who work in these countries. 
in each of these countries, i have met men and women who represent canada in our various embassies, and who do exceptional work. 
i would like to pay tribute to them, whether they are heads of mission or collaborators. 
i remember, honorable senators, of cairo, where the prime minister of canada was hosting a state dinner. 
the entire egyptian cabinet was present. 
who do you believe acted as master of ceremonies? 
isabelle martin, from quebec city, a young diplomat at our embassy. 
it was like that in each of the countries. 
i was proud to see these canadian diplomats.  
before talking about the various criticisms that the prime minister was the target of during his trip there, it should be said that, for those accompanying the prime minister, it was quite obvious that some journalists had already decided, even before arriving in the middle east, to attack mr. chretien, this attitude so contrary to journalistic ethics, and that many other journalists expressed their unease in this regard. 
the media coverage of this visit and the visit itself were so different that participants felt that two very different trips were taking place - the one we were taking with the prime minister, and the one that the canadian media reported on.  
the malice of some journalists came to a head during a general briefing organized by canadian diplomats in damascus, syria. 
we can hardly imagine the harsh and aggressive treatment that certain journalists inflicted on our ambassador in syria, mrs. alexandra bugailiskis. 
the hostility was palpable and often degenerated into outright bad faith. 
despite this, the ambassador skillfully answered questions. 
during the latest press conference in jeddah, saudi arabia, tva reporter lina dib, who has prepared some of the most biased and malicious reports, had the nerve to ask the prime minister if he had been hurt by the attacks of which she herself was the author.  
it was the first official visit by a prime minister of canada to the middle east. 
mr. chretien knew very well that he was entering a minefield to the point where his predecessors - all without exception - had refrained from visiting the region. 
he was also convinced that it was time for canada, after having been engaged in the region for more than 50 years, especially since 1956, to make an official visit to cement bilateral relations and help advance the cause of peace. . 
in fact, the visit gave an important impetus to the political dialogue between canada and each of the countries visited, helped to stimulate the exports of canadian companies active in this important market, and encouraged the peace process in which canada is very committed , underscored canada's views as chair of the refugee committee formed in madrid, promoted adherence to the ottawa accord on banning anti-personnel landmines, and, in amman, saw marrying the canadian initiative to create a regional conflict resolution center to help parties in the region - egypt, israel, jordan and the palestinians to begin with - to fortify the peace and undertake various programs such as vocational training for peacekeepers,strengthening democratic institutions and judicial reform.
our prime minister's visit will have repercussions that will continue to be felt for many years to come.  
to show that the media reports had no relation to reality, i would point out that not a single one of prime minister chretien's interlocutors expressed the slightest criticism, disapproval or reservation about his statements. 
moreover, each of them insisted on expressing, with clear and eloquent gestures, the quality of the relations they had forged with the prime minister of canada. 
president mubarak publicly expressed the cordiality of his friendship with mr. chretien, and the egyptian cabinet attended almost all of a dinner hosted by mr. chretien.  
i was referring to this dinner where the master of ceremonies was ms. isabelle martin.  
the same thing happened in israel, during a dinner hosted by prime minister barak. 
nobel peace prize winner shimon peres had set aside almost a whole day to accompany mr. chretien to an unprecedented event in nazareth, which will be discussed later.  
if necessary, we could cite similar examples for each of the meetings mr. chretien had with his counterparts in each of the countries he visited. 
for example, nearly 1,000 people attended the reception given in his honor in lebanon by the lebanese-canadian community and organized by our ambassador to lebanon, his excellency mr. haig sarafian.  
as proof, mr. chretien is the first head of government to visit the arab community of israel since the creation of this state more than half a century ago. 
according to leaders of the arab community in israel, no other head of government has yet done this.  
it is virtually impossible to describe the emotion and pride of the arab community of israel upon receiving this recognition from a leader of the g-7, after half a century of relative obscurity.  
almost 20% 100 of israel's population is arab.
this population is concentrated in the galilee, in particular in nazareth, a city that is half christian and half muslim. 
it is the largest arab city in israel, a kind of national, cultural and patriotic capital for arab israelis. 
mr. chretien, accompanied by shimon peres, visited the st-joseph seminary and secondary school of nazareth, a school attended by arab students from various backgrounds and which, for a dozen years, has been pursuing a dialogue project with the university. hebrew of jerusalem, the lyada.  
a memorable moment of the trip was when the prime minister spoke about the values   of tolerance and multiculturalism of canadians, while praising the arab community of israel.  
allow me to say, on a personal level, that i was born in haifa. 
this trip was my first return - a moment of great emotion - to the country where i was born. 
i saw the house where i was born again. 
i hadn't seen her for over half a century. 
seeing me there, with my colleagues and the prime minister of canada, to pay tribute to this community, faithful to its cultural and patriotic values, was a moment that i will cherish in my heart.  
last october, during the visit to ottawa of father emile shoufani, as they say there, abouna emile, and one of his collaborators, mrs. soad haddad, who devotes his life to his church and his community, the prime minister had said he wanted to go to nazareth to visit their school. 
it was not to meet the administration, but to see the students of this school as well as the jewish students of jerusalem. 
he addressed them. 
the prime minister wrote a page of history in doing so. 
i saw that the prime minister kept his word. 
i had tears in my eyes when i witnessed this moment which will always be present in my memory and in my heart.  
what about statements that some journalists have called blunders?  
first, there was the prime minister's mistake of not going to east jerusalem. 
how did the news get out? 
some canadian journalists visited the senior plo official responsible for the jerusalem issue, faisal husseini, and asked him what he thought about the prime minister's failure to visit east jerusalem. 
he said he was disappointed. 
it was inferred that foreign leaders usually accept the plo's invitation to visit east jerusalem and that chretien was making a mistake. 
the israelis strive to have any foreign leader who visits east jerusalem accompany senior israeli officials to show their sovereignty over a unified city. 
president clinton canceled his visit to east jerusalem when jerusalem mayor ehud olmert insisted on accompanying him.  
foreign leaders can get around the problem by visiting the holy places in east jerusalem, as chinese president jiang zemin did, just hours before mr. chretien visited them himself.  
british prime minister tony blair avoided going to east jerusalem after his foreign secretary robin cook sparked controversy by traveling to east jerusalem to meet with a palestinian lawmaker.  
president chirac's visit to east jerusalem resulted in a serious scuffle with israeli police forces. 
recognizing the role played by faical husseini as chairman of the palestinian delegation to the multilateral talks, mr. chretien asked me before leaving ottawa to co-lead, with the resident representative of canada to the palestinians and the director general of the middle -orient, who had come to the ministry of foreign affairs, an official delegation to mr. husseini. 
he assured me that the palestinians were grateful to canada for the diplomatic role it played on the question of palestine. 
after all, mr. husseini has been to ottawa several times and has been warmly welcomed by senior officials.  
in short, as you will recall, britain's foreign secretary robin cook was accused of all kinds of things when he went to east jerusalem. 
the french prime minister has also suffered all kinds of affronts and problems. 
our prime minister has suffered only from criticism from the canadian media.  
then there was the interview with plo president yasser arafat in gaza. 
this time around, mr. chretien was accused of embarrassing us with the israelis by supporting president arafat's threat to make a unilateral declaration of independence. 
the jerusalem post, an english-language newspaper owned by conrad black, reported the meeting with arafat in these terms: "chretien advises arafat not to make a unilateral declaration of independence."  
the hebrew newspaper ha'aretz ran a long article on the meeting with chretien, saying that canada supported the creation of a palestinian state, but only through negotiations. 
several paragraphs followed on arafat's appreciation of canada's role in the refugee issue and humanitarian and development assistance to the palestinian people. 
no newspaper reported support for a unilateral declaration of independence.  
in fact, the prime minister made the same remark to arafat in march 1999 in ottawa, when arafat was touring world capitals to try to restart the negotiations which were at an impasse. 
arafat had insisted that israel was not meeting the deadlines set in the oslo accords, and chretien had said that the threat of a declaration of independence was a way to move the negotiations forward. 
when the same thing had happened in ottawa a year earlier, it had caused no uproar in the canadian press.  
the third blunder was the prime minister's remark in nazareth, where he said he understood the israelis to claim the waters of the sea of   galilee. 
when asked where the border should be, the prime minister replied that it was an issue to be negotiated between syria and israel, but most of the canadian media did not pick it up.  
in fact, the conflict between syria and israel is more about borders and security than about water. 
negotiations were broken off in geneva on march 26 during a meeting between presidents assad and clinton on this issue. 
according to informed sources in europe, israel and the united states, the compromise that had been reached was that syria recognized israel's right to water rights in the sea of   galilee, but that the syrian border was to be reestablished at the june 4, 1967 line, on the northeastern shore of the lake, as well as the establishment of a kind of joint patrol to compensate for syria's concessions in relation to israel's water rights. 
israel insisted that the border be drawn 100 meters from the lake. 
in fact, many people in the region may not have been aware of the details of the failed negotiations. 
these remarks by mr. chretien were echoed by the daily baath party in damascus. 
the issue is a source of deep divisions within the israeli cabinet and, reportedly, between president assad and his foreign minister, but the pm's remarks hardly strayed from the failed compromise deal. .  
having taken note of mr. chretien's presence in nazareth, the canadian press completely forgot to mention that it was the very first time in history that a foreign political leader had visited nazareth, home to the main arab community of 'israel.  
the prime minister's visit was particularly well received at a time when tensions were high between the muslim and christian communities in nazareth. 
the prime minister's calls for tolerance and the need to respect diversity in any society were also well received by the audience, including shimon peres. 
likewise, the israeli press ran a lengthy article on the influence of canadian laws and judicial practices on israel's human rights practices. 
the stories of canadian successes in the middle east are obviously less in the headlines than supposed failures.  
the most embarrassing story would have been, according to the press, the agreement between the canadian prime minister and prime minister ehud barak, according to which canada would welcome 15,000 palestinian refugees after the conclusion of a final agreement between the plo and israel. 
this story comes from a senior adviser to prime minister barak on a flight that brought him back from an urgent meeting with clinton in washington over the failed negotiations. 
the story was publicly denied, within hours, by the prime minister himself, mr. chretien, and then by mr. barak. 
the refugee issue is one of the most controversial on the peace agenda and one for which canada's neutrality, as chair of the multilateral task force on palestinian refugees, is critical.  
the israelis were never satisfied with the task force. 
the story has been potentially damaging, particularly in lebanon where canada has repeatedly been accused by the press of attempting to settle palestinian refugees without addressing the palestinian claim, supported by the united nations, to 'a right of return and compensation.  
the israeli press reported that an expert meeting on the refugee issue, held in ottawa in 1999, had helped advance the issue of compensation. 
as with mr. arafat's or mr. husseini's visits to ottawa, the ottawa press does not appear to be interested in canadian policy in the middle east, except when there might be a story. embarrassing.  
the other stories revolved around mr. chretien's failure to criticize the syrian military presence in lebanon or human rights violations in syria and saudi arabia, but the press certainly could not have expected that. that the prime minister, during a protocol visit, directly condemn his hosts.  
the last story was about the alleged misinterpretation of dress customs in saudi arabia.  
here, honorable senators, is a review of this press. 
the visit had been planned long before the power struggle within the liberal party that so occupied the press gallery in the weeks leading up to the visit. 
canadian media have even reported that articles about the prime minister's visit to the middle east could reopen the leadership file.  
we have long lamented the relative lack of interest in foreign policy among the canadian media. 
we now have before us a classic example of a local story being played out in a foreign context where the very coverage of the case could have been an embarrassment.  
the saddest conclusion to be drawn from this whole affair is that canadians should avoid the whole question of the middle east both as a topic of discussion and as a political issue or human tragedy because they might have problems no matter what they do or do. whatever they say. 
mr. chretien had the courage to undertake the first dedicated visit to all the important countries of the middle east ever made by a canadian prime minister. 
voices:
well done!  
(on motion of senator prud'homme, debate adjourned.)  
foreign affairs 
authorization for committee to study department of foreign affairs and international trade performance report 
the honorable peter a. stollery, pursuant to notice given on may 4, 2000, moved: 
that the standing senate committee on foreign affairs be authorized to study the performance report of the department of foreign affairs and international trade for the period ending march 31, 1999, tabled in the senate on november 2, 1999 (sessional paper no. 2 / 36- 71); and
that the committee report no later than march 31, 2001.  
the honorable anne c. cools:
honorable senators, senator stollery does not wish to add anything further, the motion being relatively clear. 
the honorable senator and i worked together to draft it. 
i agree that senator stollery and his foreign affairs committee study the performance report of the department of foreign affairs and international trade.  
senator stollery and i had agreed to set the reporting deadline for august 31 of this year, but as the motion was put forward, the date changed to march 31, 2001. 
that the committee report no later than august 31, 2000.  
his honor the acting speaker:
is it the pleasure of honorable senators to adopt the motion as amended?  
voices:
okay.  
foreign affairs 
authorization given to the committee to examine developments in russia and ukraine 
the honorable peter a. stollery, in accordance with his opinion of may 4, 2000, proposes: 
that the standing senate committee on foreign affairs be authorized to examine and report on recent developments in politics, social matters, economy and security in russia and ukraine, taking into account the policies and interests canada in the region, as well as other related topics; 
that the committee present its final report no later than june 15, 2001; and that the committee retain the powers necessary to disseminate the results of its study contained in its final report until june 29, 2001.  
the honorable noel a. kinsella (deputy leader of the opposition):
honorable senators, could senator stollery tell the senate whether the record of his committee's proceedings indicates that the members of the committee unanimously seconded the motion?  
senator stollery:
honorable senators, the answer is yes. 
in fact, both parties participated in the drafting of the motion.  
his honor the acting speaker:
is it your pleasure, honorable senators, to adopt the motion?  
voices:
yes.  
(motion agreed to)  
adjournment 
permission having been granted to revert to government notices of motion: 
the honorable dan hays (deputy leader of the government), with leave of the senate and notwithstanding rule 58 (1) (h), moved: 
that, when the senate adjourns today, it remain adjourned until tomorrow, wednesday, may 10, 2000, at 1:30 pm; 
that, following the deferred vote on the amendment to bill c-2, the speaker interrupt the proceedings to adjourn the senate; 
that, should another vote be deferred until 5.30 pm tomorrow, the speaker suspend the sitting until 5.30 pm for the taking of the deferred vote; and
that all items on the orders of the day and the notice paper, which have not been addressed, remain in their current order.  
(motion agreed to)  
(the senate adjourned until wednesday, may 10, 2000, at 1:30 p.m.) 